<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXV: He Advances in the Attack on Selwoode</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Advances in the Attack on Selwoode</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-25-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>‚ÄúWell?‚Äù said Peter.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell?‚Äù said I.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs the latest quotation on heiresses?‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBlagden demanded. ‚ÄúWas she cruel, my boy, or was she kind? Did she set the dog on you or have you thrashed by her father? I fancy both, for your present hilarity is suggestive of a gentleman in the act of attendance on his own funeral.‚Äù And Peter laughed, unctuously, for his gout slumbered.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúHis attempts at wit,‚Äù I reflectively confided to my wineglass, ‚Äúwhile doubtless amiably intended, are, to his well-wishers, painful. I daresay, though, he doesn‚Äôt know it. We must, then, smile indulgently upon the elephantine gambols of what he is pleased to describe as his intellect.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNow, that,‚Äù Peter pointed out, ‚Äúis not what I would term a courteous method of discussing a man at his own table. You are damn disagreeable this morning, Bob. So I know, of course, that you have come another cropper in your fortune-hunting.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúPeter,‚Äù said I, in admiration, ‚Äúyour sagacity at times is almost human! I have spent a most enjoyable day, though,‚Äù I continued, idly. ‚ÄúI have been communing with Nature, Peter. She is about her spring-cleaning in the woods yonder, and everywhere I have seen traces of her getting things fixed for the summer. I have seen the sky, which was washed overnight, and the sun, which has evidently been freshly enamelled. I have seen the new leaves as they swayed and whispered over your extensive domains, with the fret of spring alert in every sap cell. I have seen the little birds as they hopped among said leaves and commented upon the scarcity of worms. I have seen the buxom flowers as they curtsied and danced above your flowerbeds like a miniature comic-opera chorus. And besides that‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYes?‚Äù said Peter, with a grin, ‚Äúand besides that?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAnd besides that,‚Äù said I, firmly, ‚ÄúI have seen nothing.‚Äù</p>
				<p>And internally I appraised this bloated Peter Blagden, and reflected that this was the man whom Stella had loved; and I appraised myself, and remembered that this had been the boy who once loved Stella. For, as I have said, it was the twenty-eighth of April, the day that Stella had died, two years ago.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-25-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>The next morning I discoursed with my soul, what time I sat upon the wall-top and smiled and kicked my heels to and fro among the ivy.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúFor, in spite of appearances,‚Äù I debated with myself, ‚Äúit is barely possible that the handkerchief was not hers. She may have borrowed it or have got it by mistake, somehow. In which case, it is only reasonable to suppose that she will miss it, and ask me if I saw it; on the contrary, if the handkerchief is hers, she will naturally understand, when I return the book without it, that I have feloniously detained this airy gewgaw as a souvenir, as, so to speak, a <i xml:lang="fr">gage d‚Äôamour</i>. And, in that event, she ought to be very much pleased and a bit embarrassed; and she will preserve upon the topic of handkerchiefs a maidenly silence. Do you know, Robert Etheridge Townsend, there is about you the making of a very fine logician?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Then I consulted my watch, and subsequently grimaced. ‚ÄúIt is also barely possible,‚Äù said I, ‚Äúthat Margaret may not come at all. In which case‚ÅÝ‚ÄîMargaret! Now, isn‚Äôt that a sweet name? Isn‚Äôt it the very sweetest name in the world? Now, really, you know, it is queer her being named Margaret‚ÅÝ‚Äîextraordinarily queer‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecause Margaret has always been my favourite woman‚Äôs name. I daresay, unbeknownst to myself, I am a bit of a prophet.‚Äù</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-25-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>But she did come. She was very much surprised to see me.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYou!‚Äù she said, with a gesture which was practically tantamount to disbelief. ‚ÄúWhy, how extraordinary!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYou rogue!‚Äù I commented, internally: ‚Äúyou know it is the most natural thing in the world.‚Äù Aloud I stated: ‚ÄúWhy, yes, I happened to notice you forgot your book yesterday, so I dropped in‚ÅÝ‚Äîor, to be more accurate, climbed up‚ÅÝ‚Äîto return it.‚Äù</p>
				<p>She reached for it. Our hands touched, with the usual result to my pulses. Also, there were the customary manual tinglings.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYou are very kind,‚Äù was her observation, ‚Äúfor I am wondering which one of the two he will marry.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúForman tells me he has no notion, himself.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, then you know Justus Miles Forman! How nice! I think his stories are just splendid, especially the way his heroes talk to photographs and handkerchiefs and dead flowers‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>Afterward she opened the book, and turned over its pages expectantly, and flushed a proper shade of pink, and said nothing.</p>
				<p>And then, and not till then, my heart consented to resume its normal functions. And then, also, ‚ÄúThese iron spikes‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù said its owner.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYes?‚Äù she queried, innocently.</p>
				<p>‚Äú‚ÅÝ‚Äîso humpy,‚Äù I complained.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAre they?‚Äù said she. ‚ÄúWhy, then, how silly of you to continue to sit on them!‚Äù</p>
				<p>The result of this comment was that we were both late for luncheon.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-25-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>By a peculiar coincidence, at twelve o‚Äôclock the following day, I happened to be sitting on the same wall at the same spot. Peter said at luncheon it was a queer thing that some people never could manage to be on time for their meals.</p>
				<p>I fancy we can all form a tolerably accurate idea of what took place during the next day or so.</p>
				<p>It is scarcely necessary to retail our conversations. We gossiped of simple things. We talked very little; and, when we did talk, the most ambitiously preambled sentences were apt to result in nothing more prodigious than a wave of the hand, and a pause, and, not infrequently, a heightened complexion. Altogether, then, it was not oppressively wise or witty talk, but it was eminently satisfactory to its makers.</p>
				<p>As when, on the third morning, I wished to sit by Margaret on the bench, and she declined to invite me to descend from the wall.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOn the whole,‚Äù said she, ‚ÄúI prefer you where you are; like all picturesque ruins, you are most admirable at a little distance.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúRuins!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîand, indeed, I was not yet twenty-six‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI am a comparatively young man.‚Äù</p>
				<p>As a concession, ‚ÄúIn consideration of your past, you are tolerably well preserved.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚Äú‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I am not a new brand of marmalade, either.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNo, for that comes in glass jars; whereas, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend, I have heard, is more apt to figure in family ones.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúA pun, Miss Beechinor, is the base coinage of conversation tendered only by the mentally dishonest.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚Äú‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBesides, one can never have enough of marmalade.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI trust they give you a sufficiency of it in the nursery?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúDear me, you have no idea how admirably that paternal tone sits upon you! You would make an excellent father, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend. You really ought to adopt someone. I wish you would adopt <em>me</em>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend.‚Äù</p>
				<p>I said I had other plans for her. Discreetly, she forbore to ask what they were.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-25-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>‚ÄúAvis‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYou must not call me that.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWhy not? It‚Äôs your name, isn‚Äôt it?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYes‚ÅÝ‚Äîto my friends.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAren‚Äôt we friends‚ÅÝ‚ÄîAvis?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWe! We have not known each other long enough, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, what‚Äôs the difference? We are going to be friends, aren‚Äôt we‚ÅÝ‚ÄîAvis?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWhy‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhy, I am sure I don‚Äôt know.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúGracious gravy, what an admirable colour you have, Avis! Well‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI know. And I can inform you, quite confidentially, Avis, that we are not going to be‚ÅÝ‚Äîfriends. We are going to be‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWe are going to be late for luncheon,‚Äù said she, in haste. ‚ÄúGood morning, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend.‚Äù</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-25-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>Yet, the very next day, paradoxically enough, she told me:</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI shall always think of you as a very, very dear friend. But it is quite impossible we should ever be anything else.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAnd why, Avis?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBecause‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîafter an interval‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äústrikes me as rather a poor reason. So, suppose we say this June?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Another interval.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell, Avis?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúDear me, aren‚Äôt those roses pretty? I wish you would get me one, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAvis, we are not discussing roses.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell, they <em>are</em> pretty.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAvis!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîreproachfully.</p>
				<p>Still another interval.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI hardly know.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAvis!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith disappointment.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI believe‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAvis!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîvery tenderly.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI almost think so‚ÅÝ‚Äîand the horrid man looks as if he thought so, too!‚Äù</p>
				<p>There was a fourth interval, during which the girl made a complete and careful survey of her shoes.</p>
				<p>Then, all in a breath, ‚ÄúIt could not possibly be June, of course, and you must give me until tomorrow to think about November,‚Äù and a sudden flutter of skirts.</p>
				<p>I returned to Gridlington treading on air.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-25-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>For I was, by this time, as thoroughly in love as Amadis of Gaul or Aucassin of Beaucaire or any other hero of romance you may elect to mention.</p>
				<p>Some two weeks earlier I would have scoffed at the notion of such a thing coming to pass; and I could have demonstrated, logically enough, that it was impossible for Robert Etheridge Townsend, with his keen knowledge of the world and of the innumerable vanities and whims of womankind, ever again to go the way of all flesh. But the problem, like the puzzle of the Eleatic philosophers, had solved itself. ‚ÄúAchilles cannot catch the tortoise,‚Äù but he does. It was impossible for me to fall uncomfortably deep in love‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I had done so.</p>
				<p>And it pricked my conscience, too, that Margaret should not know I was aware of her identity. But she had chosen to play the comedy to the end, and in common with the greater part of trousered humanity, I had, after all, no insuperable objection to a rich wife; though, to do me justice, I rarely thought of her, now, as Margaret Hugonin the heiress, but considered her, in a more comprehensive fashion, as the one woman in the universe whose perfections triumphantly overpeered the skyiest heights of preciosity.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
