<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<p style="margin-top: 4em">9.</p>
			<p>
				<i>He Puts His Tongue in His Cheek</i>
			</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">It was not long before John Charteris knew of the entire affair, for in those days I had few concealments from him: and the little wizened man brooded awhile over my misery, with an odd wistfulness.</p>
			<p>“I remember Amelia Van Orden perfectly,” he said⁠—“now. I ought to have recognized her. Only, she was never, in her best days, the paragon you depict. She sang, I recollect; people made quite a to-do over her voice. But she was very, very stupid, and used to make loud shrieking noises when she was amused, and was generally reputed to be ‘fast.’ I never investigated. Even so, there was not any real doubt as to her affair, in any event, with Anton von Anspach, after that night the sleigh broke down⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, spare me all those ancient Lichfield scandals! She is an angel,<br/>
			John, if there was ever one.”<br/></p>
			<p>“In your eyes, doubtless! So your heart is broken. Yet do you not realize that not a month ago you were heartbroken over Stella Musgrave? Child, I repeat, I envy you this perpetual unhappiness, for I have lost, as you will presently lose, the capacity of being quite miserable.”</p>
			<p>“But, John, it seems as if there were nothing left to live for, now⁠—”</p>
			<p>“At twenty-one! Well, certainly, at that age one loves to think of life as being implacable. But you will soon discover that she is merely inconsequential, and that none of her antics are of lasting importance; and you will learn to smile a deal more often than you weep or laugh.”</p>
			<p>Then we talked of other matters. It was presently settled that Charteris was to take me abroad with him that summer; and with the thorough approval of my mother.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris will be of incalculable benefit to you,” she told me, “in introducing you to the very best people, all of whom he knows, of course, and besides you are getting to look older than I, and it is unpleasant to have to be always explaining you are only my stepson, particularly as your father never married anybody but me, though, heaven knows, I wish he had. Of course you will be just as wild as your father and your Uncle George. I suppose that is to be expected, and I daresay it will break my heart, but all I ask of you is please to keep out of the newspapers, except of course the social items. And if you <i>must</i> associate with abandoned women, please for my sake, Robert, don’t have anything to do with those who can prove that they are only misunderstood, because they are the most dangerous kind.”</p>
			<p>I kissed her. “Dear little mother, I honestly believe that when you get to heaven you will refuse to speak to Mary Magdalen.”</p>
			<p>“Robert, let us remember the Bible says, ‘in my Father’s house are many mansions,’ and of course nobody would think of putting me in the same mansion with her.”</p>
			<p>It was well-nigh the last conversation I was to hold with my mother; and I was to remember it with an odd tenderness.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">2</p>
			<p>Upon the doings of myself in Europe during the ensuing two years I prefer to dwell as lightly as possible. I had long anticipated a sojourn in divers old-world cities; but the London I had looked to find was the London of Dickens, say, and my Paris the Paris of Dumas, or at the very least of Balzac. It is needless to mention that in the circles to which the, quite real, friendship of John Charteris afforded an entry I found little that smacked of such antiquity. I had entered a world inhabited by people who amused themselves and apparently did nothing else; and I was at first troubled by their levity, and afterward envious of it, and in the end embarked upon sedulous attempt to imitate it. I continued to be very boyish; indeed, I found myself by this in much the position of an actor who has made such a success in one particular role that the public declines to patronize him in any other.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">3</p>
			<p>It was during this first year abroad that I wrote <i>The Apostates</i>, largely through the urging of John Charteris.</p>
			<p>“You have the ability, though, that dances most gracefully in fetters. You will never write convincingly about the life you know, because life is, to you, my adorable boy, a series of continuous miracles, to which the eyes of other men are case-hardened. Write me, then, a book about the past.”</p>
			<p>“I have thought of it,” said I, “for being over here makes the past seem pretty real, somehow. Last month when I was at Ingilby I was on fire with the notion of writing something about old Ormskirk⁠—my mother’s ancestor, you know. And since I’ve seen what’s left of Bellegarde I have wanted to write about his wife’s people too⁠—the dukes and vicomtes of Puysange, or even about the great Jurgen. You see, I am just beginning to comprehend that these are not merely characters in Lowe’s and La Vrilliere’s books, but my flesh and blood kin, like Uncle George Bulmer⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And for that reason you want to write about them! You would, though; it is eminently characteristic. Well, then, why should you not immortalize the persons who had the honor of begetting you⁠—oh, most handsome and most naive of children!⁠—by writing your very best about them?” “Because to succeed⁠—not only among the general but with the ‘cultured few,’ God save the mark!⁠—it is now necessary to write not badly but abominably.”</p>
			<p>“What would you demand, then, of a book?”</p>
			<p>I meditated. “What one most desiderates in the writings of to-day is clarity, and beauty, and tenderness and urbanity, and truth.”</p>
			<p>“Not a bad recipe, upon the whole, though I would stipulate for symmetry and distinction also⁠—Write the book!”</p>
			<p>“Ah,” said I, “but this is the kind of book I wish to read when, of course, the mood seizes me. It is not at all the sort of book, though, I would elect to write. The main purpose of writing any book, I take it, is to be read; and people simply will not read a book when they suspect it of being carefully written. That sort of thing gets on a reader’s nerves; it’s too much like watching a man walk a tight-rope and wondering if he won’t slip presently.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, ‘people!’ ” Charteris flung out, in an extremity of scorn. “Since time was young, a generally incompetent humanity has been willing to pardon anything rather than the maddening spectacle of labour competently done. And they are perfectly right; it is abominable how such weak-minded persons occasionally thrust themselves into a world quite obviously designed for persons who have not any minds at all. But I was not asking you to write a ‘best-seller.’ ”</p>
			<p>“No, you were asking me to become an Economist, and be one of ‘the few rare spirits which every age providentially affords,’ and so on. That is absolute and immoral nonsense. When you publish a novel you are at least pretending to supply a certain demand; and if you don’t endeavour honestly to supply it, you are a swindler, no more and no less. No, it is all very well to write for posterity, if it amuses you, John; personally, I cannot imagine what possible benefit you will derive from it, even though posterity <i>does</i> read your books. And for myself, I want to be read and to be a power while I can appreciate the fact that I <i>am</i> a sort of power, however insignificant. Besides, I want to make some money out of the blamed thing. Mother is a dear, of course, but, like all the Bulmers, with age she is becoming tight-fisted.”</p>
			<p>“And Esau⁠—” Charteris began.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—but that’s Biblical, and publishing a book is business. People say to authors, just as they do to tailors: ‘I want such and such an article. Make it and I’ll pay you for it.’ Now, your tailor may consider the Imperial Roman costume more artistic than that of today, and so may you in the abstract, but if he sent home a toga in place of a pair of trousers, you would discontinue dealing with him. So if it amuses you to make togas, well and good; I don’t quarrel with it; but, personally, I mean to go into the gents’ furnishing line and to do my work efficiently.”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—but with your tongue in your cheek.”</p>
			<p>“It is the one and only attitude,” I sweetly answered, “in which to write if you indeed desire to be read with enjoyment.” And presently I rose and launched upon</p>
			<p>
				<i>A Defence of That Attitude</i>
			</p>
			<p>“The main trouble with you, John Charteris, is that you will never recover from being <i>fin de siecle</i>. Yes, you belong to that queer dying nineteenth century. And even so, you have quite overlooked what is, perhaps, the signal achievement of the nineteenth century⁠—the relegation of its literature to the pharmacopoeia. The comparison of the tailor, I willingly admit, is a bad one. Those who write successfully nowadays must appeal to men and women who seek in fiction not only a means of relaxation, but spiritual comfort as well, and an uplifting rather than a mere diversion of the mind; so that they are really druggists who trade exclusively in intoxicants and hypnotics.</p>
			<p>“Half of the customers patronize the reading-matter shops because they want to induce delusions about a world they know, and do not find particularly roseate and the other half skim through a book because they haven’t anything else to do and aren’t sleepy, as yet.</p>
			<p>“Oh, in filling either prescription the trick is much the same; you have simply to avoid bothering the reader’s intellect in any way whatever. You have merely to drug it, you have merely to caress it with interminable platitudes, or else with the most uplifting avoidances of anything which happens to be unprintably rational. And you must remember always that the crass emotions of half-educated persons are, in reality, your chosen keyboard; so play upon it with an axe if you haven’t any handier implement, but hit it somehow, and for months your name will be almost as famous as that of my mother’s father remains the year round because he invented a celebrated baking-powder.</p>
			<p>“It is all very well for you to sneer, and talk about art. But there are already in this world a deal more Standard Works than any man can hope to digest in the average lifetime. I don’t quarrel with them, for, personally, I find even Ruskin, like the python in the circus, entirely endurable so long as there is a pane of glass between us. But why, in heaven’s name, should you endeavour to harass humanity with one more battalion of morocco-bound reproaches for sins of omission, whenever humanity goes into the library to take a nap? For what other purpose do you suppose a gentleman goes into his library, pray? When he is driven to reading he does it decently in bed.</p>
			<p>“Besides, if I like a book, why, then, in so far as I am concerned, it <i>is</i> a good book. No, please don’t talk to me about ‘the dignity of literature’; modern fiction has precisely as much to do with dignity as has vaudeville or billiards or that ridiculous Prohibitionist Party, since the object of all four, I take it, is to afford diversion to people who haven’t anything better to do. Thus, a novel which has diverted a thousand semi-illiterate persons is exactly ten times as good as a novel that has pleased a hundred superior persons. It is simply a matter of arithmetic.</p>
			<p>“You prefer to look upon writing as an art, rather than a business? Oh, you silly little man, the touchstone of any artist is the skill with which he adapts his craftsmanship to his art’s limitations. He will not attempt to paint a sound or to sculpture a colour, because he knows that painting and sculpture have their limitations, and he, quite consciously, recognizes this fact whenever he sets to work.</p>
			<p>“Well, the most important limitation of writing fiction nowadays is that you have to appeal to people who would never think of reading you or anybody else, if they could possibly imagine any other employment for that particular vacant half-hour. And you cannot hope for an audience of even moderately intelligent persons, because intelligent persons do not attempt to keep abreast with modern fiction. It is probably ascribable to the fact that they enjoy being intelligent, and wish to remain so.</p>
			<p>“You sneer at the ‘best-sellers.’ I tell you, in sober earnest, that the writing of a frankly trashy novel which will ‘sell,’ is the highest imaginable form of art. For true art, in its last terms, is the adroit circumvention of an unsurmountable obstacle. I suppose that form and harmony and colour are very difficult to tame; and the sculptor, the musician and the painter quite probably earn their hire. But people don’t go to concerts unless they want to hear music; whereas the people who buy the ‘best-sellers’ are the people who would prefer to do <i>anything</i> rather than be reduced to reading. I protest that the man who makes these people read on until they see how ‘it all came out’ is a deal more than an artist; he is a sorcerer.”</p>
			<p>And I paused, a little out of breath.</p>
			<p>“What a boy it is!” said Charteris. “Do you know, you are uncommonly handsome when you are talking nonsense? Write the trashy book, then. I never argue with children; and besides, I do not have to read it.”</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">4</p>
			<p>It thus fell about that in the second European year, not very long after my mother’s death, <i>The Apostates</i> was given to the world, with what result the world has had a plenty of time wherein to forget.⁠ ⁠… It was first published in <i>The Quaker Post</i>, with pictures by Roderick King Hill, and in the autumn was brought out as a book by Stuyvesant and Brothers. I made rather a good thing cut of it financially; but the numerous letters I received from the people who had liked it I found extremely objectionable. They were not the right sort of people, I felt forlornly.⁠ ⁠… So I endured my plaudits without undue elation, for I always held <i>The Apostates</i> to be, at best, a medley of conventional tricks and extravagant rhetoric, inanimate by any least particle of myself⁠—and its success, say, as though the splendiferous trappings of an emperor were hung upon a clothier’s dummy, and the result accepted as an adequate presentation of Charlemagne.</p>
			<p>In other words, the book was the most unbridled kind of balderdash, founded on my callow recollections of the Green Chalybeate⁠—not the least bit accurate, as I was afterward to discover⁠—with all the good people exceedingly oratorical and the bad ones singularly epigrammatic and abandoned and obtuse. I introduced a depraved nobleman, of course, to give the requisite touch of high society, seasoned the mixture with French and botany and with a trifle of Dolly Dialoguishness, and inserted, at judicious intervals, the most poetical of descriptions, so that the skipping of them might afford an agreeable rest to the reader’s eye. There was also a sufficiency of piddling with unsavoury matters to insure the suffrage of schoolgirls.</p>
			<p>And a number of persons, in fine, were so misguided as to enthuse over the result. The verb is carefully selected, for they one and all were just the sort of people who “enthuse.”</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">5</p>
			<p>I was vexed, however, at the time to find I could not achieve an appropriate emotion over my mother’s death. The news came, to be sure, at a season when I was preoccupied with getting rid of Agnes Faroy.⁠ ⁠… I have not ever heard of any rational excuse for the quite common assumption that children ought to be particularly fond of their parents. Still, my mother was the prettiest woman I had ever known, though without any claim to beauty, and I had always gloried in our kinship; for I believed her nature to be generous and amiable when she thought of it; and the cablegram which announced the event aroused in me sincere regret that a comely ornament to my progress had been smashed irrevocably.</p>
			<p>For a little I reflected as to whither she had vanished, and decided she had been too futile and well-meaning ever to be punished by any reasonable Being. Yet how she would have enjoyed the publication of my book!⁠—without any attempt to read it, however, since she had never, to my knowledge, read anything, with the exception of the daily papers.⁠ ⁠… And besides, I disliked being unable to have the appropriate emotion.</p>
			<p>But I simply could not manage it. For here, in the midst of the Faroy mess⁠—with Agnes weeping all over the place, and her brothers flourishing pistols and declaiming idiocies⁠—came the news from Uncle George that my mother had left me virtually nothing. She must have used up, of course, a good share of her Bulmer Baking Powder money in supporting my father comfortably; but she had always lived in such estate as to make me assume she had retained, anyhow, enough of the Bulmer money to last my time. So it was naturally a shock to discover that this monetary attitude was inherited from my mother, who had been cheerfully “living on her principle” all these years, without considering my future. I had no choice but to regard it as abominably selfish.</p>
			<p>“I think Claire was afraid to tell you,” wrote Uncle George, “how little there was left. In any event, she always shirked doing it, so as to stave off unpleasantness. And when we cabled you how ill she was, it now seems most unfortunate you could not see your way clear to giving up your trip through the chateau country, as your not coming appeared to be on her mind a great deal at the last. I do not wish to seem to criticize you in any way, Robert, but I must say.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Well, but you know what sort of nonsense that smug gambit heralds in letters from your kindred. Even so, I now owned the Townsend house and an income sufficient for daily bread; and it looked just then as though the magazine editors were willing to furnish the butter, and occasional cakes. So the future promised to be pleasant enough.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">6</p>
			<p>Charteris had returned to Algiers in the autumn my book was published, but I elected to pass the winter in England. “Of course,” was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris’s annotation⁠—“because it is precisely the most dangerous spot in the world for you. And you are to spend October at Negley? I warn you that Jasper Hardress is in love with his wife, and that the woman has an incurable habit of making experiments and an utter inability to acquire experience. Take my advice, and follow <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Monteagle to the Riviera, instead. Cissie will strip you of every penny you have, of course, but in the end you will find her a deal less expensive than Gillian Hardress.”</p>
			<p>“You possess a low and evil mind,” I observed, “since I am fond, in all sincerity, of Hardress, whereas his wife is not even civil to me. Why, she goes out of her way to be rude to me.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris; “but that is because she is getting worried about her interest in you. And what is the meaning of this, by the way? I found it on your table this morning.” He read the doggerel aloud with an unkindly and uncalled-for exaggeration of the rhyming words.</p>
			<p>“We did not share the same inheritance⁠—<br/>
			I and this woman, five years older than I,<br/>
			Yet daughter of a later century⁠—<br/>
			Who is therefore only wearied by that dance<br/>
			Which has set my blood a-leaping.<br/></p>
			<p>“It is queer<br/>
			To note how kind her face grows, listening<br/>
			To my wild talk, and plainly pitying<br/>
			My callow youth, and seeing in me a dear<br/>
			Amusing boy⁠—yet somewhat old to be<br/>
			Still reading <i>Alice Through the Looking-Glass</i><br/>
			And <i>Water-Babies</i>.⁠ ⁠… With light talk we pass,<br/></p>
			<p>“And I that have lived long in Arcady⁠—<br/>
			I that have kept so many a foolish tryst,<br/>
			And written drivelling rhymes⁠—feel stirring in me<br/>
			Droll pity for this woman who pities me,<br/>
			And whose weak mouth so many men have kissed.”<br/></p>
			<p>“That,” I airily said, “is, in the first place, something you had no business to read; and, in the second, simply the blocking out of an entrancingly beautiful poem. It represents a mood.”</p>
			<p>“It is the sort of mood that is not good for people, particularly for children. It very often gets them shot too full of large and untidy holes.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense!” said I, but not in displeasure, because it made me feel like such a devil of a fellow. So I finished my letter to Bettie Hamlyn⁠—for this was on the seventh⁠—and I went to Negley precisely as I had planned.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">7</p>
			<p>“We were just speaking of you,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hardress told me, the afternoon of my arrival⁠—“Blanche and I were talking of you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, the very moment we heard your wheels.”</p>
			<p>I shook hands. “I trust you had not entirely stripped me of my reputation?”</p>
			<p>“Surely, that is the very last of your possessions any reasonable person would covet?”</p>
			<p>“A palpable hit,” said I. “Nevertheless, you know that all I possess in the world is yours for the asking.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you mentioned as much, I think, at Nice. Or was it Colonel Tatkin who offered me a heart’s devotion and an elopement? No, I believe it was you. But, dear me, Jasper is so disgustingly healthy that I shall probably never have any chance of recreation.”</p>
			<p>I glanced toward Jasper Hardress. “I have heard,” said I, hopefully, “that there is consumption in the family?”</p>
			<p>“Heavens, no! he told me that before marriage to encourage me, but I find there is not a word of truth in it.”</p>
			<p>Then Jasper Hardress came to welcome his guest, and save from a distance I saw no more that evening of Gillian Hardress.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
