<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Revisits Fairhaven and the Play</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-5-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>So I went to Willoughby Hall, which stands, as you may be aware, upon the eastern outskirt of Fairhaven. My reappearance created some stir among the older students and the town-folk, though, one and all, they presently declared me to be “too stuck-up for any use,” inasmuch as I ignored them in favour of the Charteris house-party⁠—after, of course, one visit to Chapel, which I paid a little obviously <i xml:lang="fr">en prince</i>, and affably shook hands with all the Faculty, and was completely conscious of how such happenings impressed us when I, too, was a student.</p>
				<p>So much had happened since then, and I felt so much older⁠—with my existence so delightfully blighted, too⁠—that it seemed droll to find Colonel Snawley and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Jeal still sitting in arm chairs before Clarriker’s Emporium, very much as I had left them there ten months ago.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-5-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>By a disastrous chance did Bettie Hamlyn spend that spring, as well as the preceding year, in Colorado with her mother, who died there that summer; and to me Fairhaven proper without Bettie Hamlyn seemed a tawdry and desolate place; and I know that but for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hamlyn’s illness⁠—a querulous woman for whom I never cared a jot⁠—my future life had been quite otherwise. For, as I told Bettie once, and it was true, I have found in the world but three sorts of humanity⁠—“Myself, and Bettie Hamlyn, and the other people.”</p>
				<p>So I still wrote to Bettie Hamlyn on the seventh of every month⁠—because that was her birthday⁠—and again on the twenty-third, because that was mine.</p>
				<p>And I thought of many things as I walked by the deserted garden, where there was nothing which concerned me now, not even a ghost. I did not go in to leave a card upon Professor Hamlyn. The empty house confronted me too blankly, with its tight-shuttered windows, like blind eyes, and I hurried by.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-5-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Meanwhile, this was the first time for many years that Willoughby Hall had been occupied by any other than caretakers; and Fairhaven, to confess the truth, was a trifle ill-at-ease before the modish persons who now tenanted the old mansion; and consoled itself after an immemorial usage by backbiting.</p>
				<p>And meanwhile I enjoyed myself tremendously. It was the first time I was ever thrown with people who were unanimously agreed that, after all, nothing is very serious. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Charteris, of course, was different; but she, like the others, found me divertingly naive and, in consequence, petted and cosseted me. I like petting; and since everyone seemed agreed to regard me as “the Child in the House”⁠—that was Alicia Wade’s nickname, and it clung⁠—and to like having a child in the house, I began a little to heighten my very real boyishness. There was no harm in it; and if people were fonder of me because I sat upon the floor by preference, and drolly exaggerated what I really thought, it became a sort of public duty to do these things. So I did, and found it astonishingly pleasant.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-5-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>And meanwhile too, John Charteris could never see enough of me, whom, as I today suspect, Charteris was studying conscientiously, to the end that I should be converted into “copy.” For me, I was waiting cannily until he should actually ask to see those manuscripts I had brought to Willoughby Hall, and should help me to get them published. So there were two of us.⁠ ⁠… In any event, it was just three weeks after Stella’s marriage that Charteris coaxed me into Fairhaven’s Opera House to witness a performance of <i epub:type="se.name.publication.play">Romeo and Juliet</i>, by the Imperial Dramatic Company.</p>
				<p>I went under protest; I had witnessed the butchery of so many dramas within these walls during my college days, that I knew what I must anticipate, I said. I had, as a matter of fact, always enjoyed the Opera House “shows,” but I did not wish to acknowledge the harboring of such crude tastes to Charteris. In any event, at the conclusion of the second act⁠—</p>
				<p>“By Jove!” said I, in a voice that shook a little. “She’s a stunner!” I jolted out, as I proceeded to applaud, vigorously, with both hands and feet. “And who would have thought it! Good Lord, who would have thought it!”</p>
				<p>Charteris smiled, in that infernally patronizing way he had sometimes. “A beautiful woman, my dear boy⁠—an inordinately beautiful woman, in fact, but entirely lacking in temperament.”</p>
				<p>“Temperament!” I scoffed; “what’s temperament to two eyes like those? Why, they’re as big as golf-balls! And her voice⁠—why, a violin⁠—a very superior violin⁠—if it could talk, would have just such a voice as that woman has! Temperament! Oh, you make me ill! Why, man, just look at her!” I said, conclusively.</p>
				<p>Charteris looked, I presume. In any event, the Juliet of the evening stood before the curtain, smiling, bowing to right and left. The citizens of Fairhaven were applauding her with a certain conscientious industry, for they really found Romeo and Juliet a rather dull couple. The general opinion, however, was that Miss Montmorenci seemed an elegant actress, and in some interesting play, like <i epub:type="se.name.publication.play">The Two Orphans</i> or <i epub:type="se.name.publication.play">Lady Audley’s Secret</i>, would be well worth seeing. Upon those who had witnessed her initial performance, she had made a most favorable impression in <i epub:type="se.name.publication.play">The Lady of Lyons</i>; while at the Tuesday matinee, as Lady Isabel in <i epub:type="se.name.publication.play">East Lynne</i>, she had wrung the souls of her hearers, and had brought forth every handkerchief in the house. Moreover, she was very good-looking⁠—quite the lady, some said; and, after all, one cannot expect everything for twenty-five cents; considering which circumstances, Fairhaven applauded with temperate ardor, and made due allowance for Shakespeare as being a classic, and, therefore, of course, commendable, but not necessarily interesting.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-5-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>“Well?” I queried, when she had vanished. I was speaking under cover of the orchestra⁠—a courtesy title accorded a very ancient and very feeble piano. “Well, and what do you think of her⁠—of her looks, I means? Who cares for temperament in a woman!”</p>
				<p>Charteris assumed a virtuous expression. “I don’t dare tell you,” said he; “you forget I am a married man.”</p>
				<p>Then I frowned a little. I often resented Charteris’s flippant allusion to a wife whom I considered, with some reason, to be vastly too good for her husband. And I considered how near I had come to remaining with the others at Willoughby Hall⁠—for that new game they called bridge-whist! And I decided I would never care for bridge. How on earth could presumably sensible people be content to coop themselves in a drawing-room on a warm May evening, when hardly a mile away was a woman with perfectly unfathomable eyes and a voice which was a love-song? Of course, she couldn’t act, but, then, who wanted her to act? I indignantly demanded of my soul.</p>
				<p>One simply wanted to look at her, and hear her speak. Charteris, with his prattle about temperament, was an ass; when a woman is born with such eyes and with a voice like that, she has done her full duty by the world, and has prodigally accomplished all one has the tiniest right to expect of her.</p>
				<p>It was impossible she was in reality as beautiful as she seemed, because no woman was quite so beautiful as that; most of it was undoubtedly due to rouge and rice-powder and the footlights; but one could not be mistaken about the voice. And if her speech was that, what must her singing be! I thought; and in the outcome I remembered this reflection best of all.</p>
				<p>I consulted my programme. It informed me, in large type at the end, that Juliet was “old Capulet’s daughter,” and that the part was played by Miss Annabelle Alys Montmorenci.</p>
				<p>And I sighed. I admitted to myself that from a woman who wilfully assumed such a name little could be hoped. Still, I would like to see her off the stage⁠ ⁠… without all those gaudy fripperies and gewgaws⁠ ⁠… merely from curiosity.⁠ ⁠… Then too, they said those actresses were pretty gay.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-5-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>“A most enjoyable performance,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris, as we came out of the Opera House. “I have always had a sneaking liking for burlesque.”</p>
				<p>Thereupon he paused to shake hands with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Adrian Rabbet, wife to the rector of Fairhaven.</p>
				<p>“Such a sad play,” she chirped, “and, do you know, I am afraid it is rather demoralizing in its effects on young people. No, of course, I didn’t think of bringing the children, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris⁠—Shakespeare’s language is not always sufficiently obscure, you know, to make that safe. And besides, as I so often say to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rabbet, it is sad to think of our greatest dramatist having been a drinking man. It quite depressed me all through the play to think of him hobnobbing with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson at the Tabard Inn, and making such irregular marriages, and stealing sheep⁠—or was it sheep, now?”</p>
				<p>I said that, as I remembered, it was a fox, which he hid under his cloak until the beast bit him.</p>
				<p>“Well, at any rate, it was something extremely deplorable and characteristic of genius, and I quite feel for his wife.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rabbet sighed, and endeavored, I think, to recollect whether it was <i epub:type="se.name.publication.play">Ingomar</i> or <i epub:type="se.name.publication.play">Spartacus</i> that Shakespeare wrote. “However,” she concluded, “they play <i epub:type="se.name.publication.play">Ten Nights in a Barroom</i> on Thursday, and I shall certainly bring the children then, for I am always glad for them to see a really moral and instructive drama. That reminds me! I absolutely must tell you what Tom said about actors the other day⁠—”</p>
				<p>And she did. This led naturally to Matilda’s recent and blasphemous comments on George Washington, and her observations as to the rector’s dog, and little Adey’s personal opinion of Elisha. And so on, in a manner not unfamiliar to fond parents. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rabbet said toward the end that it was a most enjoyable chat, although to me it appeared to partake rather of the nature of a monologue. It consumed perhaps a half-hour; and when we two at last relinquished <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rabbet to her husband’s charge, it was with a feeling not altogether unakin to relief.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-5-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>We walked slowly down Fairhaven’s one real street, which extends due east from the College for as much as a mile, to end inconsequently in those carefully preserved foundations, which are now the only remnant of a building wherein a number of important matters were settled in Colonial days. There Cambridge Street divides like a Y, one branch of which leads to Willoughby Hall.</p>
				<p>Our route from the Opera House thus led through the major part of Fairhaven, which, after an evening of unwonted dissipation, was now largely employed in discussing the play, and turning the cat out for the night. The houses were mostly dark, and the moon, nearing its full, silvered row after row of blank windows. There was an odour of growing things about, for in Fairhaven the gardens are many.</p>
				<p>Then it befell that I made a sudden exclamation.</p>
				<p>“Eh?” said Charteris.</p>
				<p>“Why, nothing,” I explained, lucidly.</p>
				<p>It may be mentioned, however, that we were, at this moment, passing a tall hedge of box, set about a large garden. The hedge was perhaps five feet six in height; Charteris was also five feet six, whereas I was an unusually tall young man, and topped my host by a good half-foot.</p>
				<p>“I say,” I observed, after a little, “I’m all out of cigarettes. I’ll go back to the drugstore,” I suggested, as seized with a happy thought, “and get some. I noticed it was still open. Don’t think of waiting for me,” I urged, considerately.</p>
				<p>“Why, great heavens!” Charteris ejaculated; “take one of mine. I can recommend them, I assure you⁠—and, in any event, there are all sorts, I fancy, at the house. They keep only the rankest kind of domestic tobacco yonder.”</p>
				<p>“I prefer it,” I insisted, “oh, yes, I really prefer it. So much milder and more wholesome, you know. I never smoke any other sort. My doctor insists on my smoking the very rankest tobacco I can get. It is much better for the heart, he says, because you don’t smoke so much of it, you know. Besides,” I concluded, virtuously, “it is infinitely cheaper; you can get twenty cigarettes all for five cents at some places. I really must economize, I think.”</p>
				<p>Charteris turned, and with great care stared in every direction. He discovered nothing unusual. “Very well!” assented <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris; “I, too, have an eye for bargains. I will go with you.”</p>
				<p>“If you do alive,” quoth I, quite honestly, “I devoutly desire that all sorts of unpleasant things may happen to me for not having wrung your neck first.”</p>
				<p>Charteris grinned. “Immoral young rip!” said he; “I warn you, before entering the ministry, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rabbet was accounted an excellent shot.”</p>
				<p>“Get out!” said I.</p>
				<p>And the fervour of my utterance was such that Charteris proceeded to obey. “Don’t be late for breakfast, if you can help it,” he urged, kindly. “Of course, though, you are up to some new form of insanity, and I shall probably be sent for in the morning, to bail you out of the lockup.”</p>
				<p>Thereupon he turned on his heel, and went down the deserted street, singing sweetly.</p>
				<p>Sang <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris:</p>
				<p>“Curly gold locks cover foolish brains,<br/>
				Billing and cooing is all your cheer,<br/>
				Sighing and singing of midnight strains<br/>
				Under bonnybells” window-panes.<br/>
				Wait till you’ve come to forty year!<br/></p>
				<p>“Forty times over let Michaelmas pass,<br/>
				Grizzling hair the brain doth clear;<br/>
				Then you know a boy is an ass,<br/>
				Then you know the worth of a lass,<br/>
				Once you have come to forty-year.”<br/></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
