<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII: He Duels with a Stupid Woman</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Duels with a Stupid Woman</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-8-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Yet I approached the garden on Saturday night with an elated heart. This was the last evening of the engagement of the Imperial Dramatic Company. Tomorrow the troupe was to leave Fairhaven; but I was very confident that the leading lady would not accompany them, and by reason of this confidence, I smiled as I strode through the city of Fairhaven, and hummed under my breath an inane ditty of an extremely sentimental nature.</p>
				<p>As I bent over the little wooden gate, and searched for its elusive latch, a man came out of the garden, wheeling sharply about the hedge that, until this, had hidden him; and simultaneously, I was aware of the mingled odour of bad tobacco and of worse whiskey. Well, she would have done with such people soon! I threw open the gate, and stood aside to let him pass; then, as the moon fell full upon the face of the man, I gave an inarticulate, startled sound.</p>
				<p>“Fine evening, sir,” suggested the stranger.</p>
				<p>“Eh?” said I; “eh? Oh, yes, yes! quite so!” Afterward I shrugged my shoulders, and went into the garden, a trifle puzzled.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>I found her beneath a great maple in the heart of the enclosure. It was a place of peace; the night was warm and windless, and the moon, now come to its full glory, rode lazily in the west through a froth of clouds. Everywhere the heavens were faintly powdered with stardust, but even the planets seemed pale and ineffectual beside the splendour of the moon.</p>
				<p>The garden was drenched in moonshine⁠—moonshine that silvered the unmown grass-plots, and converted the white rosebushes into squat-figured wraiths, and tinged the red ones with dim purple hues. On every side the foliage blurred into ambiguous vistas, where fireflies loitered; and the long shadows of the nearer trees, straining across the grass, were wried patterns scissored out of blue velvet. It was a place of peace and light and languid odours, and I came into it, laughing, the possessor of an over-industrious heart and of a perfectly unreasoning joy over the fact that I was alive.</p>
				<p>“I say,” I observed, as I stretched luxuriously upon the grass beside her, “you put up at a shockingly disreputable place, Signorina.” “Yes?” said she.</p>
				<p>“That fellow who just went out,” I explained⁠—“do you know the police want his address, I think? No,” I continued, after consideration, “I am sure I’m not mistaken⁠—that is either Ned Lethbury, the embezzler, or his twin-brother. It’s been five years since I saw him, but that is he. And that,” said I, with proper severity, “is a sample of the sort of associate you prefer to your humble servant! Ah, Signorina, Signorina, I am a tolerably worthless chap, I admit, but at least I never forged and embezzled and then skipped my bail! So you had much better marry me, my dear, and say goodbye to your peculating friends. But, deuce take it! I forgot⁠—I ought to notify the police or something, I suppose.”</p>
				<p>She caught my arm. Her mouth opened and shut again before she spoke. “He⁠—he is my husband,” she said, in a toneless voice. Then, on a sudden, she wailed: “Oh, forgive me! Oh, my great, strong, beautiful boy, forgive me, for I am very unhappy, and I cannot meet your eyes⁠—your honest eyes! Ah, my dear, my dear, do not look at me like that⁠—you don’t know how it hurts!”</p>
				<p>The garden noises lisped about us in the long silence that fell. Then the far-off whistling of some home going citizen of Fairhaven tinkled shrilly through the night, and I shuddered a bit.</p>
				<p>“I don’t understand,” I commenced, strangely quiet. “You told me⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Ah, I lied to you! I lied to you!” she cried. “I didn’t, mean to⁠—hurt you. I did not know⁠—I couldn’t know⁠—I was so lonely, Bobbie,” she pleaded, with wide eyes; “oh, you don’t know how lonely I am. And when you came to me that first night, you⁠—why, you spoke to me as the men I once knew used to speak. There was respect in your voice, and I wanted that so; I hadn’t had a man speak to me like that for years, you know, Bobbie. And, boy dear, I was so lonely in my squalid world⁠—and it seemed as if the world I used to know was calling me⁠—your world, Bobbie⁠—the world I am shut out from.”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I said; “I think I understand.”</p>
				<p>“And I thought for a week⁠—just to peep into it, to be a lady again for an hour or two⁠—why, it didn’t seem wicked, then, and I wanted it so much! I⁠—I knew I could trust you, because you were only a boy. And I was hungry⁠—<em>so</em> hungry for a little respect, a little courtesy, such as men don’t accord strolling actresses. So I didn’t tell you till the very last I was married. I lied to you. Oh, but you don’t understand, this stupid, honest boy doesn’t understand anything except that I have lied to him!”</p>
				<p>“Signorina,” I said, again, and I smiled, resolutely, “I think I understand.” I took both her hands in mine, and laughed a little. “But, oh, my dear, my dear,” I said, “you should have told me that you loved another man; for you have let me love you for a week, and now I think that I must love you till I die.”</p>
				<p>“Love him!” she echoed. “Oh, boy dear, boy dear, what a Galahad it is! I don’t think Ned ever cared for anything but Father’s money; and I⁠—why, you have seen him. How <em>could</em> I love him?” she asked, as simply as a child.</p>
				<p>I bowed my head. “And yet⁠—” said I. Then I laughed again, somewhat bitterly. “Don’t let’s tell stories, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lethbury,” I said; “it is kindly meant, I know, but I remember you now. I even danced with you once, some seven years ago⁠—yes, at the Green Chalybeate. I remember the night, for a variety of reasons. You are Alfred Van Orden’s daughter; your father is a wealthy man, a very wealthy man; and yet, when your⁠—your husband disappeared you followed him⁠—to become a strolling actress. Ah, no, a woman doesn’t sacrifice everything for a man in the way you have done, unless she loves him.”</p>
				<p>I caught my breath. Some unknown force kept tugging down the corners of my mouth, in a manner that hampered speech; moreover, nothing seemed worth talking about. I had lost her. That was the one thing which mattered.</p>
				<p>“Why, of course, I went with him,” she assented, a shade surprised; “he was my husband, you know. But as for loving⁠—no, I don’t think Ned ever really loved me,” she reflected, with puckering brows. “He took that money for⁠—for another woman, if you remember. But he is fond of me, and⁠—and he <em>needs</em> me.”</p>
				<p>I did not say anything; and after a little she went on, with a quick lift of speech.</p>
				<p>“Oh, what a queer life we have led since then! You can’t imagine it, my dear. He has been a tavern-keeper, a drummer⁠—everything! Why, last summer we sold rugs and Turkish things in Atlantic City! But he is always afraid of meeting someone who knows him, and⁠—and he drinks too much. So we have not got on in the world, Ned and I; and now, after three years, I’m the leading lady of the Imperial Dramatic Company, and he is the manager. I forgot, though⁠—he is advance-agent this week, for he didn’t dare stay in Fairhaven, lest some of the men at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris’s should recognize him, you know. He came back only this evening⁠—”</p>
				<p>She paused for a moment; a wistful quaver crept into her speech. “Oh, it’s queer, it’s queer, Bobbie! Sometimes⁠—sometimes when I have time to think, say on long Sunday afternoons, I remember my old life, every bit of it⁠—oh, I do remember such strange little details! I remember the designs on the bread and butter plates, and all the silver things on my desk, and the plank by my door that always creaked and somehow never got fixed, and the big, shiny buttons on the coachman’s coat⁠—just trifles like that. And⁠—and they hurt, they hurt, Bobbie, those little, unimportant things! They⁠—grip my throat.”</p>
				<p>She laughed, not very mirthfully. “Then I am like the old lady in the nursery rhyme, and say, Surely, this can’t be I. But it is I, boy dear⁠—a strolling actress, a barnstormer! Isn’t it queer, Bobbie? But, oh, you don’t know half⁠—”</p>
				<p>I was remembering many things. I remembered Lethbury, a gross man, superfluously genial, whom I had never liked, although I recalled my admiration of his whiskers. I recollected young Amelia Van Orden, not come to her full beauty then, the bud of girlhood scarce slipped; and I remembered very vividly the final crash, the nine days’ talk over Lethbury’s flight in the face of certain conviction⁠—by his father-in- law’s advice (as some said) who had furnished and forfeited heavy bail for the absconder. Oh, the brave woman who had followed! Oh, the brave, foolish woman! And, for the action’s recompense, he was content to exhibit her to yokels, to make of her beauty an article of traffic. Heine was right; there is an Aristophanes in heaven. And then hope blazed.</p>
				<p>“Your husband,” I said, quickly, “he does not love you? He⁠—he is not faithful to you?”</p>
				<p>“No,” she answered; “there is a Miss Fortescue⁠—she plays second parts⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Ah, my dear, my dear!” I cried, with a shaking voice; “come away, Signorina⁠—come away with me! He <em>doesn’t</em> need you⁠—and, oh, my dear, I need you so! You can get your divorce and marry me. Ah, Signorina, come away⁠—come away from this squalid life that is killing you, to the world you are meant for, to the life you hunger for! Come back to the clean, lighthearted world you love, the world that is waiting to pet and caress you just as it used to do⁠—our world, Signorina! You don’t belong here with⁠—with the Fortescues. You belong to us.”</p>
				<p>I sprang to my feet. “Come now!” said I. “There’s Anne Charteris; she is a good woman, if ever lived one. She used to know you, too, didn’t she? Well, then, come with me to her, dearest⁠—and tonight! You shall see your father tomorrow. Your father⁠—why, think how that old man loves you, how he has longed for you, his only daughter, all these years. And I?” I spread out my hands, in the tiniest, impotent gesture. “I love you,” I said, simply. “I cannot do without you, heart’s dearest.”</p>
				<p>Impulsively, she rested both hands upon my breast; then bowed her head a little. The nearness of her seemed to shake in my blood, to catch at my throat, and my hands, lifted for a moment, trembled with desire of her.</p>
				<p>“You don’t understand,” she said. “I am a Catholic⁠—my mother was one, you know. There is no divorce for us. And⁠—and besides, I’m not modern. I am very old-fashioned, I suppose, in my ideas. Do you know,” she asked, with a smile upon the face which lifted confidingly toward me, “I⁠—I <em>really</em> believe the world was made in six days; and that the whale swallowed Jonah, and that there is a real purgatory and a hell of fire and brimstone. You don’t, do you, Bobbie? But I do⁠—and I promised to stay with him till death parted us, you know, and I must do it. I am all he has. He would get even worse without me. I⁠—oh, boy dear, boy dear, I love you so!” And her voice broke, in a great, choking sob.</p>
				<p>“A promise⁠—a promise made by an ungrown girl to a brute⁠—a thief⁠—!”</p>
				<p>“No, dear,” she answered, quietly; “a promise made to God.”</p>
				<p>And looking into her face, I saw love there, and anguish, and determination. It seemed monstrous, but of a sudden I knew with a dull surety; she loved me, but she thought she had no right to love me; she would not go with me. She would go with that drunken, brutish thief.</p>
				<p>And I suddenly recalled certain clever women⁠—Alicia Wade, Pauline Ashmeade, Cynthia Chaytor⁠—the women of that world wherein I was novitiate; beyond question, they would raise delicately penciled eyebrows to proclaim this woman a fool⁠—and to wonder.</p>
				<p>They would be right, I thought. She was only a splendid, tenderhearted, bright-eyed fool, the woman that I loved. My heart sickened as her folly rose between us, an impassable barrier. I hated it; and I revered it.</p>
				<p>Thus we two stood silent for a time. The wind murmured above in the maples, lazily, ominously. Then the gate clicked, with a vicious snap that pierced the silence like the report of a distant rifle. “That is probably Ned,” she said wearily. “I had forgotten they close the barrooms earlier on Saturday nights. So goodbye, Bobbie. You⁠—you may kiss me, if you like.”</p>
				<p>So for a moment our lips met. Afterward I caught her hands in mine, and gripped them close to my breast, looking down into her eyes. They glinted in the moonlight, deep pools of sorrow, and tender⁠—oh, unutterably tender and compassionate.</p>
				<p>But I found no hope there. I lifted her hand to my lips, and left her alone in the garden.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-8-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Lethbury was fumbling at the gate.</p>
				<p>“Such nuishance,” he complained, “havin’ gate won’t unlock. Latch mus’ got los’⁠—po’ li’l latch,” murmured <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lethbury, plaintively⁠—“all ’lone in cruel worl’!”</p>
				<p>I opened the gate for him, and stood aside to let him pass toward his wife.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
