<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV: He Decides to Amuse Himself</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Decides to Amuse Himself</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-15-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>I came to Fairhaven half-bedrugged with memories of Stella’s funeral⁠—say, of how lightly she had lain, all white and gold, in the grotesque and horrid box, and of Peter’s vacant red-rimmed eyes that seemed to wonder why this decorous company should have assembled about the deep and white-lined cavity at his feet and find no answer. Nor, for that matter, could I.</p>
				<p>“But it was flagrant, flagrant!” my heart screeched in a grill of impotent wrath. “Eh, You gave me power to reason, so they say! and will You slay me, too, if I presume to use that power? I say, then, it was flagrant and tyrannical and absurd! ‘Let twenty pass, and stone the twenty-first, Loving not, hating not, just choosing so!’ O Setebos, it wasn’t worthy of omnipotence. You know it wasn’t!” In such a frame of mind I came again to Bettie Hamlyn.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-15-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>It was very odd to see Bettie again. I had been sublimely confident, though, that we would pick up our intercourse precisely where we had left off; and this, as I now know, is something which can never happen to anybody. So I was vaguely irritated before we had finished shaking hands, and became so resolutely boyish and effusive in my delight at seeing her that anyone in the world but Bettie Hamlyn would have been quite touched. And my conversational gambit, I protest, was masterly, and would have made anybody else think, “Oh how candid is the egotism of this child!” and would have moved that person, metaphorically anyhow, to pat me upon the head.</p>
				<p>But Bettie only smiled, a little sadly, and answered:</p>
				<p>“Your book?⁠—Why, dear me, did I forget to write you a nice little letter about how wonderful it was?”</p>
				<p>“You wrote the letter all right. I think you copied it out of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Complete Letter Writer</i>. There was not a bit of you in it.”</p>
				<p>“Well, that is why I dislike your book⁠—because there was not a bit of <em>you</em> in it. Of course I am glad it was the big noise of the month, and also a little jealous of it, if you can understand that phase of the feminine mind. I doubt it, because you write about women as though they were pterodactyls or some other extinct animal, which you had never seen, but had read a lot about.”</p>
				<p>“Which attests, in any event, my morals to be above reproach. You should be pleased.”</p>
				<p>“To roll it into a pill, your book seems pretty much like any other book; and it has made me hold my own particular boy’s picture more than once against my cheek and say, ‘You didn’t write books, did you, dear?⁠—You did nicer things than write books’⁠—and he did.⁠ ⁠… I hear many things of you.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Oh, well!” I brilliantly retorted, “you mustn’t believe all you hear.” And I felt that matters were going very badly indeed.</p>
				<p>“Robin, do you not know that your mess of pottage must be eaten with you by the people who care for you?⁠—and one of them dislikes pottage. Indeed, I <em>would</em> have liked the book, had anybody else written it. I almost like it as it is, in spots, and sometimes I even go to the great length of liking you⁠—because ‘if only for old sake’s sake, dear, you’re the loveliest doll in the world.’ There might be a better reason, if you could only make up your mind to dispense with pottage.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>The odd part of it, even today, is that Bettie was saying precisely what I had been thinking, and that to hear her say it made me just twice as petulant as I was already.</p>
				<p>“Now, please don’t preach,” I said. “I’ve heard so much preaching lately⁠—dear,” I added, though I am afraid the word was rather obviously an afterthought.</p>
				<p>“Oh, I forgot you stayed over for Stella Blagden’s funeral. You were quite right. Stella was a dear child, and I was really sorry to hear of her death.”</p>
				<p>“Really!” It was the lightest possible additional flick upon the raw, but it served.</p>
				<p>“Yes⁠—I, too, was rather sorry, Bettie, because I have loved Stella all my life. She was the first, you see, and, somehow, the others have been different. And⁠—she disliked dying. I tell you, it is unfair, Bettie⁠—it is hideously unfair!”</p>
				<p>“Robin⁠—” she began.</p>
				<p>“And why should you be living,” I said, in half-conscious absurdity, “when she is dead? Why, look, Bettie! even that fly yonder is alive. Setebos accords an insect what He grudges Stella! Her dying is not even particularly important. The big news of the day is that the President has started his Pacific tour, and that the Harvard graduates object to his being given an honorary degree, and are sending out seven thousand protests to be signed. And you’re alive, and I’m alive, and Peter Blagden is alive, and only Stella is dead. I suppose she is an angel by this. But I don’t care for angels. I want just the silly little Stella that I loved⁠—the Stella that was the first and will always be the first with me. For I want her⁠—just Stella⁠—! Oh, it is an excellent jest; and I will cap it with another now. For the true joke is, I came to Fairhaven, across half the world, with an insane notion of asking you to marry me⁠—you who are ‘really’ sorry that Stella is dead!” And I laughed as pleasantly as one may do in anger.</p>
				<p>But the girl, too, was angry. “Marry you!” she said. “Why, Robin, you were wonderful once; and now you are simply not a bad sort of fellow, who imagines himself to be the hit of the entire piece. And whether she’s dead or not, she never had two grains of sense, but just enough to make a spectacle of you, even now.”</p>
				<p>“I regret that I should have sailed so far into the north of your opinion,” said I. “Though, as I dare assert, you are quite probably in the right. So I’ll be off to my husks again, Bettie.” And I kissed her hand. “And that too is only for old sake’s sake, dear,” I said.</p>
				<p>Then I returned to the railway station in time for the afternoon train. And I spoke with no one else in Fairhaven, except to grunt “Good evening, gentlemen,” as I passed Clarriker’s Emporium, where Colonel Snawley and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Jeal were sitting in arm chairs, very much as I had left them there two years ago.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-15-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>It was a long while afterward I discovered that “some damned good-natured friend,” as Sir Fretful has immortally phrased it, had told Bettie Hamlyn of seeing me at the theatre in Lichfield, with Stella and her marvellous dinner-company. It was by an odd quirk the once Aurelia Minns, in Lichfield for the “summer’s shopping,” who had told Bettie. And the fact is that I had written Bettie upon the day of Stella’s death and, without explicitly saying so, had certainly conveyed the impression I had reached Lichfield that very morning, and was simply stopping over for Stella’s funeral. And, in addition, I cannot say that Bettie and Stella were particularly fond of each other.</p>
				<p>As it was, I left Fairhaven the same day I reached it, and in some dissatisfaction with the universe. And I returned to Lichfield and presently reopened part of the old Townsend house.⁠ ⁠… “Robert and I,” my mother had said, to Lichfield’s delectation, “just live downstairs in the two lower stories, and ostracise the third floor.⁠ ⁠…” And I was received by Lichfield society, if not with open arms at least with acquiescence. And Byam, an invaluable mulatto, the son of my cousin Dick Townsend and his housekeeper, made me quite comfortable.</p>
				<p>Depend upon it, Lichfield knew a deal more concerning my escapades than I did. That I was “deplorably wild” was generally agreed, and a reasonable number of seductions, murders and arsons was, no doubt, accredited to me “on quite unimpeachable authority, my dear.”</p>
				<p>But I was a Townsend, and Lichfield had been case-hardened to Townsendian vagaries since Colonial days; and, besides, I had written a book which had been talked about; and, as an afterthought, I was reputed not to be an absolute pauper, if only because my father had taken the precaution, customary with the Townsends, to marry a woman with enough money to gild the bonds of matrimony. For Lichfield, luckily, was not aware how near my pleasure-loving parents had come, between them, to spending the last cent of this once ample fortune.</p>
				<p>And, in fine, “Well, really now⁠—?” said Lichfield. Then there was a tentative invitation or two, and I cut the knot by accepting all of them, and talking to every woman as though she were the solitary specimen of feminity extant. It was presently agreed that gossip often embroidered the actual occurrence and that wild oats were, after all, a not unheard-of phenomenon, and that though genius very often, in a phrase, forgot to comb its hair, these tonsorial deficiencies were by the broadminded not appraised too strictly.</p>
				<p>I did not greatly care what Lichfield said one way or the other. I was too deeply engrossed: first, in correcting the final proofs of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Afield</i>, my second book, which appeared that spring and was built around⁠—there is no harm in saying now⁠—my relations with Gillian Hardress; secondly, in the remunerative and uninteresting task of writing for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Woman’s Weekly</i> five “wholesome love-stories with a dash of humor,” in which She either fell into His arms “with a contented sigh” or else “their lips met” somewhere toward the ending of the seventh page; and, thirdly, in diverting myself with Celia Reindan.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-15-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>That, though, is a business I shall not detail, because it was one of the very vulgarest sort. It was the logical outgrowth of my admiration for her yellow hair⁠—she did have extraordinary hair, confound her!⁠—and of a few moonlit nights. It was simply the result of our common vanity and of her book-fed sentimentality and, eventually, of her unbridled temper; and in nature the compound was an unsavoury mess which thoroughly delighted Lichfield. Lichfield will be only too glad, even nowadays, to discourse to you of how I got wedged in that infernal transom, and of how Celia alarmed everybody within two blocks of her bedroom by her wild yells.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-15-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>I had meanwhile decided, first, to write another and a better book than <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Apostates</i> or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Afield</i> had ever pretended to be; and afterward to marry Rosalind Jemmett, whom I found, in my too-hackneyed but habitual phrase, “adorable.” For this Rosalind was an eminently “sensible match,” and as such, I considered, quite appropriate for a Townsend.</p>
				<p>The main thing though, to me, was to write the book of which I had already the central idea⁠—very vague, as yet, but of an unquestionable magnificence. Development of it, on an at all commensurate scale, necessitated many inconveniences, and among them, the finding of someone who would assist me in imbuing the love-scenes⁠—of which there must unfortunately be a great many⁠—with reality; and for the tale’s milieu I again pitched upon the Green Chalybeate⁠—where, as you may remember, I first met with Stella.</p>
				<p>So I said a not unpromising farewell to Rosalind Jemmett, who was going into Canada for the summer. She was quite frankly grieved by the absolute necessity of my taking a rigorous course of the Chalybeate waters, but agreed with me that one’s health is not to be trifled with. And of course she would write if I really wanted her to, though she couldn’t imagine <em>why</em>⁠—But I explained why, with not a little detail. And she told me, truthfully, that I was talking like an idiot; and was not, I thought, irrevocably disgusted by my idiocy. So that, all in all, I was not discontented when I left her.</p>
				<p>Then I ordered Byam to pack and, by various unveracious representations, induced my Uncle George Bulmer⁠—as a sort of visible and outward sign that I forgave him for declining to lend me another penny⁠—to accompany me to the Green Chalybeate. Besides, I was fond of the old scoundrel.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-15-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>When I began to scribble these haphazard memories I had designed to be very droll concerning the “provincialism” of Lichfield; for, as every inhabitant of it will tell you, it is “quite hopelessly provincial,”⁠—and this is odd, seeing that, as investigation will assure you, the city is exclusively inhabited by self-confessed cosmopolitans. I had meant to depict Fairhaven, too, in the broad style of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cranford</i>, say; and to be so absolutely sidesplitting when I touched upon the Green Chalybeate as positively to endanger the existence of any apoplectic reader, who presumed to peruse the chapter which dealt with this resort.</p>
				<p>But, upon reflection, I am too familiar with these places to attempt to treat them humorously. The persons who frequent their byways are too much like the persons who frequent the byways of any other place, I find, at bottom. For to write convincingly of the persons peculiar to any locality it is necessary either to have thoroughly misunderstood them, or else perseveringly to have been absent from daily intercourse with them until age has hardened the brain-cells, and you have forgotten what they are really like. Then, alone, you may write the necessary character studies which will be sufficiently abundant in human interest.</p>
				<p>For, at bottom, any one of us is tediously like any other. Comprehension is the grave of sympathy; scratch deeply enough and you will find not any livelily-coloured Tartarism, but just a mediocre and thoroughly uninteresting human being. So I may not ever be so droll as I had meant to be; and if you wish to chuckle over the grotesque places I have lived in, you must apply to persons who have spent two weeks there, and no more.</p>
				<p>For the rest, Lichfield, and Fairhaven also, got at and into me when I was too young to defend myself. Therefore Lichfield and Fairhaven cannot ever, really, seem to me grotesque. To the contrary, it is the other places which must always appear to me a little queer when judged by the standards of Fairhaven and Lichfield.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
