<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI: He Postures Among Chimney-Pots</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Postures Among Chimney-Pots</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-11-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>I met the Charterises in Genoa, just as I had planned. Anne’s first exclamation was, “Heavens, child, how dissipated you look! I would scarcely have known you.”</p>
				<p>Charteris said nothing. But he and I lunched at the Isotta the following day, and at the conclusion of the meal the little man leaned back and lighted a cigarette.</p>
				<p>“You must overlook my wife’s unfortunate tendency toward the most unamiable of virtues. But, after all, you are clamantly not quite the boy I left at Liverpool last October. Where are your Hardresses now?”</p>
				<p>“In London for the season. And why is your wife rushing on to Paris, John?”</p>
				<p>“Shopping, as usual. Yes, I believe I did suggest it was as well to have it over and done with. Anne is very partial to truisms. Besides, she has an aunt there, you know. Take my advice, and always marry a woman who is abundantly furnished with attractive and visitable relations, for this precaution is the true secret of every happy marriage. We may, then, regard the Hardress incident as closed?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, Lord, yes!” said I, emphatically.</p>
				<p>“Well, after all, you have been sponging off them for a full year. The adjective is not ill-chosen, from what I hear. I fancy <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hardress has found you better company after she had mixed a few drinks for you, and so⁠—But a truce to moral reflections! for I am desirous once more to hear the chimes at midnight. I hear Francine is in Milan?”</p>
				<p>“There is at any rate in Milan,” said I, “a magnificent Gothic Cathedral of international reputation; and upon the upper gallery of its tower, as my guidebook informs me, there is a watchman with an efficient telescope. Should I fail to meet that watchman, John, I would feel that I had lived futilely. For I want both to view with him the Lombard plain, and to ask him his opinion of Cino da Pistoia, and as to what was in reality the middle name of Cain’s wife.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-11-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>Francine proved cordial; but John Charteris was ever fickle, and not long afterward an Italian countess, classic in feature, but in coloring smacking of an artistic renaissance, had drawn us both to Switzerland, and thence to Liége. It was great fun, knocking about the Continent with John, for he knew exactly how to order a dinner, and spoke I don’t know how many languages, and seemed familiar with every side-street and back-alley in Europe. For myself, my French as acquired in Fairhaven appeared to be understood by everybody, but in replying very few of the natives could speak their own foolish language comprehensibly. I could rarely make head or tail out of what they were jabbering about.</p>
				<p>I was alone that evening, because Annette’s husband had turned up unexpectedly; and Charteris had gone again to hear Nadine Neroni, the new prima donna, concerning whom he and his enameled Italian friend raved tediously. But I never greatly cared for music; besides, the opera that night was <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Faust</i>; the last act of which in particular, when three persons align before the footlights and scream at the top of their voices, for a good half hour, about how important it is not to disturb anybody, I have never been able to regard quite seriously.</p>
				<p>So I was spending this evening sedately in my own apartments at the Continental; and meanwhile I lisped in numbers that (or I flattered myself) had a Homeric tang; and at times chewed the end of my pencil meditatively. “From present indications,” I was considering, “that Russian woman is cooking something on her chafing-dish again. It usually affects them that way about dawn.”</p>
				<p>I began on the next verse viciously, and came a cropper over the clash of two sibilants, as the distant clamour increased. “Brutes!” said I, disapprovingly. “Sere, clear, dear⁠—Now they have finished, ‘<i xml:lang="fr">Jamais, monsieur</i>’, and begun crying, ‘Fire!’ Oh, this would draw more than three souls out of a weaver, you know! Mere, near, hemisphere⁠—no, but the Greeks thought it was flat. By Jove! I do smell smoke!”</p>
				<p>Wrapping my dressing-gown about me⁠—I had afterward reason to thank the kindly fates that it was the green one with the white fleurs-de-lis, and not my customary, unspeakably disreputable bathrobe, scorched by the cigarette ashes of years⁠—I approached the door and peeped out into the empty hotel corridor. The incandescent lights glimmered mildly through a gray haze which was acrid and choking to breathe; little puffs of smoke crept lazily out of the lift-shaft just opposite; and downstairs all Liége was shouting incoherently, and dragging about the heavier pieces of hotel furniture.</p>
				<p>“By Jove!” said I, and whistled a little disconsolately as I looked downward through the bars about the lift-shaft.</p>
				<p>“Do you reckon,” spoke a voice⁠—a most agreeable voice⁠—“we are in any danger?”</p>
				<p>The owner of the voice was tall; not even the agitation of the moment prevented my observing that, big as I am, her eyes were almost on a level with my shoulder. They were not unpleasant eyes, and a stray dream or two yet lingered under their heavy lids. The owner of the voice wore a strange garment that was fluffy and pink⁠—pale pink like the lining of a seashell⁠—and billows of white and the ends of various blue ribbons peeped out about her neck. I made mental note of the fact that disordered hair is not necessarily unbecoming; it sometimes has the effect of an unusually heavy halo set about the face of a half-awakened angel.</p>
				<p>“It would appear,” said I, meditatively, “that, in consideration of our being on the fifth floor, with the lift-shaft drawing splendidly, and the stairs winding about it⁠—except the two lower flights, which have just fallen in⁠—and in consideration of the fire department’s probable incompetence to extinguish anything more formidable than a tar-barrel⁠—yes, it would appear, I think, that we might go further than ‘dangerous’ and find a less appropriate adjective to describe the situation.”</p>
				<p>“You mean we cannot get down?” The beautiful voice was tremulous.</p>
				<p>And my silence made reply.</p>
				<p>“Well, then,” she suggested, cheerfully, after due reflection, “since we can’t go down, why not go up?”</p>
				<p>As a matter of fact, nothing could be more simple. We were on the top floor of the hotel, and beside us, in the niche corresponding to the stairs below, was an iron ladder that led to a neatly-whitewashed trapdoor in the roof. Adopting her suggestion, I pushed against this trapdoor and found that it yielded readily; then, standing at the top of the ladder, I looked about me on a dim expanse of tiles and chimneys; yet farther off were the huddled roofs and gables of Liége, and just a stray glimpse of the Meuse; and above me brooded a clear sky and the naked glory of the moon.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-11-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>I lowered my head with a distinct sigh of relief.</p>
				<p>“I say,” I called, “it is infinitely nicer up here⁠—superb view of the city, and within a minute’s drop of the square! Better come up.”</p>
				<p>“Go first,” said she; and subsequently I held for a moment a very slender hand⁠—a ridiculously small hand for a woman whose eyes were almost on a level with my shoulder⁠—and we two stood together on the roof of the Hôtel Continental. We enjoyed, as I had predicted, an unobstructed view of Liége and of the square, wherein two toy-like engines puffed viciously and threw impotent threads of water against the burning hotel beneath us, and, at times, on the heads of an excited throng erratically clad.</p>
				<p>But I looked down moodily, “That,” said I, as a series of small explosions popped like pistol shots, “is the café; and, oh, Lord! there goes the only decent Scotch in all Liége!”</p>
				<p>“There is Mamma!” she cried, excitedly; “there!” She pointed to a stout woman, who, with a purple? shawl wrapped about her head, was wringing her hands as heartily as a birdcage, held in one of them, would permit. “And she has saved Bill Bryan!”</p>
				<p>“In that case,” said I, “I suppose it is clearly my duty to rescue the remaining member of the family. You see,” I continued, in bending over the trapdoor and tugging at the ladder, “this thing is only about twenty feet long; but the kitchen wing of the hotel is a little less than that distance from the rear of the house behind it; and with this as a bridge I think we might make it. In any event, the roof will be done for in a half-hour, and it is eminently worth trying.” I drew the ladder upward.</p>
				<p>Then I dragged this ladder down the gentle slant of the roof, through a maze of ghostly chimneys and dim skylights, to the kitchen wing, which was a few feet lower than the main body of the building. I skirted the chimney and stepped lightly over the eaves, calling, “Now then!” when a muffled cry, followed by a crash in the courtyard beneath, shook my heart into my mouth. I turned, gasping; and found the girl lying safe, but terrified, on the verge of the roof.</p>
				<p>“It was a bucket,” she laughed, “and I stumbled over it⁠—and it fell⁠—and⁠—and I nearly did⁠—and I am frightened!”</p>
				<p>And somehow I was holding her hand in mine, and my mouth was making irrelevant noises, and I was trembling. “It was close, but⁠—look here, you must pull yourself together!” I pleaded; “because we haven’t, as it were, the time for airy badinage and repartee⁠—just now.”</p>
				<p>“I can’t,” she cried, hysterically. “Oh, I am so frightened! I can’t!”</p>
				<p>“You see,” I said, with careful patience, “we must go on. I hate to seem too urgent, but we <em>must</em>, do you understand?” I waved my hand toward the east. “Why, look!” said I, as a thin tongue of flame leaped through the open trapdoor and flickered wickedly for a moment against the paling gray of the sky.</p>
				<p>She saw and shuddered. “I’ll come,” she murmured, listlessly, and rose to her feet.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-11-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>I heaved another sigh of relief, and waving her aside from the ladder, dragged it after me to the eaves of the rear wing. As I had foreseen, this ladder reached easily to the eaves of the house behind the rear wing, and formed a passable though unsubstantial-looking bridge. I regarded it disapprovingly.</p>
				<p>“It will only bear one,” said I; “and we will have to crawl over separately after all. Are you up to it?”</p>
				<p>“Please go first,” said she, very quiet. And, after gazing into her face for a moment, I crept over gingerly, not caring to look down into the abyss beneath.</p>
				<p>Then I spent a century in impotence, watching a fluffy, pink figure that swayed over a bottomless space and moved forward a hair’s breadth each year. I made no sound during this interval. In fact, I do not remember drawing a really satisfactory breath from the time I left the hotel-roof, until I lifted a soft, faint-scented, panting bundle to the roof of the Councillor von Hollwig.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-11-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>“You are,” I cried, with conviction, “the bravest, the most⁠—er⁠—the bravest woman I ever knew!” I heaved a little sigh, but this time of content. “For I wonder,” said I, in my soul, “if you have any idea what a beauty you are! what a wonderful, unspeakable beauty you are! Oh, you are everything that men ever imagined in dreams that left them weeping for sheer happiness⁠—and more! You are⁠—you, and I have held you in my arms for a moment; and, before high heaven, to repurchase that privilege I would consent to the burning of three or four more hotels and an odd city or so to boot!” But, aloud, I only said, “We are quite safe now, you know.”</p>
				<p>She laughed, bewilderingly. “I suppose,” said she, “the next thing is to find a trapdoor.”</p>
				<p>But there were, so far as we could discover, no trapdoors in the roof of the Councillor von Hollwig, or in the neighbouring roofs; and, after searching three of them carefully, I suggested the propriety of waiting till dawn to be melodramatically rescued.</p>
				<p>“You see,” I pointed out, “everybody is at the fire over yonder. But we are quite safe here, I would say, with an entire block of houses to promenade on; moreover, we have cheerful company, eligible central location in the very heart of the city, and the superb spectacle of a big fire at exactly the proper distance. Therefore,” I continued, and with severity, “you will please have the kindness to explain your motives for wandering about the corridors of a burning hotel at four o’clock in the morning.”</p>
				<p>She sat down against a chimney and wrapped her gown about her. “I sleep very soundly,” said she, “and we did both museums and six churches and the Palais de Justice and a deaf and dumb place and the cannon-foundry today⁠—and the cries awakened me⁠—and I reckon Mamma lost her head.”</p>
				<p>“And left you,” thought I, “left you⁠—to save a canary-bird! Good Lord! And so, you are an American and a Southerner as well.”</p>
				<p>“And you?” she asked.</p>
				<p>“Ah⁠—oh, yes, me!” I awoke sharply from admiration of her trailing lashes. The burning hotel was developing a splendid light wherein to see them. “I was writing⁠—and I thought that Russian woman had a few friends to supper⁠—and I was looking for a rhyme when I found you,” I concluded, with a fine coherence.</p>
				<p>She looked up. It was incredible, but those heavy lashes disentangled quite easily. I was seized with a desire to see them again perform this interesting feat. “Verses?” said she, considering my slippers in a new light.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I admitted, guiltily⁠—“of Helen.”</p>
				<p>She echoed the name. It is an unusually beautiful name when properly spoken. “Why, that is my name, only we call it Elena.”</p>
				<p>“Late of Troy Town,” said I, in explanation.</p>
				<p>“Oh!” The lashes fell into their former state. It was hopeless this time; and manual aid would be required, inevitably. “I should think,” said my compatriot, “that live women would be more⁠—inspiring.”</p>
				<p>“Surely,” I assented. I drew my gown about me and sat down. “But, you see, she is alive⁠—to me.” And I dwelt a trifle upon the last word.</p>
				<p>“One would gather,” said she, meditatively, “that you have an unrequited attachment for Helen of Troy.”</p>
				<p>I sighed a melancholy assent. The great eyes opened to their utmost. The effect was as disconcerting as that of a ship firing a broadside at you, but pleasanter. “Tell me all about it,” said she, coaxingly.</p>
				<p>“I have always loved her,” I said, with gravity. “Long ago, when I was a little chap, I had a book⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Stories of the Trojan War</i>, or something of the sort. And there I first read of Helen⁠—and remembered. There were pictures⁠—outline pictures⁠—of quite abnormally straight-nosed warriors, with flat draperies which amply demonstrated that the laws of gravity were not yet discovered; and the pictures of slender goddesses, who had done their hair up carefully and gone no further in their dressing. Oh, the book was full of pictures⁠—and Helen’s was the most manifestly impossible of them all. But I knew⁠—I knew, even then, of her beauty, of that flawless beauty which made men’s hearts as water and drew the bearded kings to Ilium to die for the woman at sight of whom they had put away all memories of distant homes and wives; that flawless beauty which buoyed the Trojans through the ten years of fighting and starvation, just with delight in gazing upon Queen Helen day by day, and with the joy of seeing her going about their streets. For I remembered!” And as I ended, I sighed effectively.</p>
				<p>“I know,” said she.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">“ ‘Or ever the knightly years had gone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With the old world to the grave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I was a king in Babylon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And you were a Christian slave.’ ”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Yes, only I was the slave, I think, and you⁠—er⁠—I mean, there goes the roof, and it is an uncommonly good thing for posterity you thought of the trapdoor. Good thing the wind is veering, too. By Jove! look at those flames!” I cried, as the main body of the Continental toppled inward like a house of cards; “they are splashing, actually splashing, like waves over a breakwater!”</p>
				<p>I drew a deep breath and turned from the conflagration, only to encounter its reflection in her widened eyes. “Yes, I was a Trojan warrior,” I resumed; “one of the many unknown men who sought and found death beside Scamander, trodden down by Achilles or Diomedes. So they died knowing they fought in a bad cause, but rapt with that joy they had in remembering the desire of the world and her perfect loveliness. She scarcely knew that I existed; but I had loved her; I had overheard some laughing words of hers in passing, and I treasured them as men treasure gold. Or she had spoken, perhaps⁠—oh, day of days!⁠—to me, in a low, courteous voice that came straight from the back of the throat and blundered very deliciously over the perplexities of our alien speech. I remembered⁠—even as a boy, I remembered.”</p>
				<p>She cast back her head and laughed merrily. “I reckon,” said she, “you are still a boy, or else you are the most amusing lunatic I ever met.”</p>
				<p>“No,” I murmured, and I was not altogether playacting now, “that tale about Polyxo was a pure invention. Helen⁠—and the gods be praised for it!⁠—can never die. For it is hers to perpetuate that sense of unattainable beauty which never dies, which sways us just as potently as it did Homer, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Faustus, and the Merovingians too, I suppose, with memories of that unknown woman who, when we were boys, was very certainly some day, to be our mate. And so, whatever happens, she</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">“Abides the symbol of all loveliness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of beauty ever stainless in the stress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of warring lusts and fears.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“For she is to each man the one woman that he might have loved perfectly. She is as old as youth, she is more old than April even, and she is as ageless. And, again like youth and April, this Helen goes about the world in varied garments, and to no two men is her face the same. Oh, very often she transmutes her fleshly covering. But through countless ages I, like every man alive, have followed her, and fought for her, and won her, and have lost her in the end⁠—but always loving her as every man must do. And I prefer to think that some day⁠—” But my voice here died into a whisper, which was in part due to emotion and partly to an inability to finish the sentence satisfactorily. The logic of my verses when thus paraphrased from memory, seemed rather vague.</p>
				<p>“Yes⁠—like Pythagoras,” she said, a bit at random. “Oh, I know. There really must be something in it, I have often thought, because you actually do remember having done things before sometimes.”</p>
				<p>“And why not? as the March Hare very sensibly demanded.” But now my voice was earnest. “Yes, I believe that Helen always comes. Is it simply a proof that I, too, am qualified to sit next to the Hatter?” I spread out my hands in a helpless little gesture. “I do not know. But I believe that she will come⁠—and by and by pass on, of course, as Helen always does.”</p>
				<p>“You will know her?” she queried, softly.</p>
				<p>Now I at last had reached firm ground. “She will be very tall,” I said, “very tall and exquisite⁠—like a young birch-tree, you know, when its new leaves are whispering over to one another the secrets of spring. Yes, that is a ridiculous sounding simile, but it expresses the general effect of her⁠—the <i xml:lang="fr">coup d’oeil</i>, so to speak⁠—quite perfectly. Moreover, her hair will be a miser’s dream of gold; and it will hang heavily about a face that will be⁠—quite indescribable, just as the dawn yonder is past the utmost preciosity of speech. But her face will flush and will be like the first of all anemones to peep through black, good-smelling, and as yet unattainable earth; and her eyes will be deep, shaded wells where, just as in the proverb, truth lurks.”</p>
				<p>But now I could not see her eyes.</p>
				<p>“No,” I conceded, “I was wrong. For when men talk to her as⁠—as they cannot but talk to her, her face will flush dull red, almost like smouldering wood; and she will smile a little, and look out over a great fire, such as that she saw on the night when Ilium was sacked and the slain bodies were soft under her stumbling feet, as she fled through flaming Troy Town. And then I shall know her.”</p>
				<p>My companion sighed; and the woes of centuries weighed down her eyelids obstinately. “It is bad enough,” she lamented, “to have lost all one’s clothes⁠—that new organdie was a dream, and I had never worn it; but to find yourself in a dressing-gown⁠—at daybreak, on a strange roof⁠—and with an unintroduced lunatic⁠—is positively terrible!”</p>
				<p>The unintroduced lunatic rose to his feet and waved his hand toward the east. The dawn was breaking in angry scarlet and gold that spread like fire over half the visible horizon; the burning hotel shut out the remaining half with tall flames, which shouldered one another monotonously, and seemed lustreless against the pure radiance of the sky. Chill daylight showed in melting patches through the clouds of black smoke overhead.</p>
				<p>It was a world of fire, transfigured by the austere magnificence of dawn and the grim splendour of the shifting, roaring conflagration; and at our feet lay the orchard of the Councillor von Hollwig, and there the awakened birds piped querulously, and sparks fell crackling among apple-blossoms.</p>
				<p>“Ilium is ablaze,” I quoted; “and the homes of Pergamos and its towering walls are now one sheet of flame.”</p>
				<p>She inspected the scene, critically. “It does look like Ilium,” she admitted. “And that,” peering over the eaves into the deserted by-street, “looks like a milkman.”</p>
				<p>I was unable to deny this, though an angry concept crossed my mind that any milkman, with commendable tastes and feelings, would at this moment be gaping at the fire at the other end of the block, rather than prosaically measuring quarts at the Councillor’s side-entrance. But there was no help for it, when chance thus unblushingly favoured the proprieties; in consequence I clung to a water-pipe, and explained the situation to the milkman, with a fretted mind and King’s College French.</p>
				<p>I turned to my companion. She was regarding the burning hotel with an impersonal expression.</p>
				<p>“Now I would give a deal,” I thought, “to know just how long you would prefer that milkman to take in coming back.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
