<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Earns a Stick-pin</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>“Dear me!” said Stella, wonderingly; “I would never have known you in the world! You’ve grown so fa⁠—I mean, you are so well built. I’ve grown? Nonsense!⁠—and besides, what did you expect me to do in six years?⁠—and moreover, it is abominably rude of you to presume to speak of me in that abstracted and figurative manner⁠—quite as if I were a debt or a taste for drink. It is really only French heels and a pompadour, and, of course, you can’t have this dance. It’s promised, and I hop, you know, frightfully.⁠ ⁠… Why, naturally, I haven’t forgotten⁠—How could I, when you were the most disagreeable boy I ever knew?”</p>
				<p>I ventured a suggestion that caused Stella to turn an attractive pink, and laugh. “No,” said she, demurely, “I shall never never sit out another dance with you.”</p>
				<p>So she did remember!</p>
				<p>Subsequently: “Our steps suit perfectly⁠—Heavens! you are the fifth man who has said that to-night, and I am sure it would be very silly and very tiresome to dance through life with anybody. Men are so absurd, don’t you think? Oh, yes, I tell them all⁠—every one of them⁠—that our steps suit, even when they have just ripped off a yard or so of flounce in an attempt to walk up the front of my dress. It makes them happy, poor things, and injures nobody. You liked it, you know; you grinned like a pleased cat. I like cats, don’t you?”</p>
				<p>Later: “That is absolute nonsense, you know,” said Stella, critically. “Do you always get red in the face when you make love? I wouldn’t if I were you. You really have no idea how queer it makes you look.”</p>
				<p>Still later: “No, I don’t think I am going anywhere to-morrow afternoon,” said Stella.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>So that during the fleet moments of these Finals, while our army was effecting a landing in Cuba, I saw as much of Stella as was possible; and veracity compels the admission that she made no marked effort to prevent my doing so. Indeed, she was quite cross, and scornful, about the crowning glory being denied her, of going with me to the Baccalaureate Address the morning I received my degree. To that of course I took Bettie.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>I said good-bye to Bettie Hamlyn rather late one evening. It was in her garden. The Finals were over, and Stella had left Fairhaven that afternoon. I was to follow in the morning, by an early train.</p>
				<p>It was a hot, still night in June, with never a breath of air stirring. In the sky was a low-hung moon, full and very red. It was an evil moon, and it lighted a night that was unreasonably ominous. And Bettie and I had talked of trifles resolutely for two hours.</p>
				<p>“Well⁠—good-bye Bettie,” I said at last. “I’m glad it isn’t for long.” For of course we meant never to let a month elapse without our seeing each other.</p>
				<p>“Good-bye,” she said, and casually shook hands.</p>
				<p>Then Bettie Hamlyn said, in a different voice: “Robin, you come of such a bad lot, and already you are by way of being a rather frightful liar. And I’m letting you go. I’m turning you over to Stellas and mothers and things like that just because I have to. It isn’t fair. They will make another Townsend of my boy, and after all I’ve tried to do. Oh, Robin, don’t let anybody or anything do that to you! Do try to do the unpleasant thing sometimes, my dear!⁠—But what’s the good of promising?”</p>
				<p>“And have I ever failed you, Bettie?”</p>
				<p>“No⁠—not me,” she answered, almost as though she grudged the fact. Then Bettie laughed a little. “Indeed, I’m trying to believe you never will. Oh, indeed, I am. But just be honest with me, Robin, and nothing else will ever matter very much. I don’t care what you do, if only you are always honest with me. You can murder people, if you like, and burn down as many houses as you choose. You probably will. But you’ll be honest with me⁠—won’t you?⁠—and particularly when you don’t want to be?”</p>
				<p>So I promised her that. And sometimes I believe it is the only promise which I ever tried to keep quite faithfully.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>And all the ensuing summer I followed Stella Musgrave from one watering place to another, with an engaging and entire candor as to my desires. I was upon the verge of my majority, when, under the terms of my father’s will, I would come into possession of such fragments of his patrimony as he had omitted to squander. And afterward I intended to become excessively distinguished in this or that profession, not as yet irrevocably fixed upon, but for choice as a writer of immortal verse; and I was used to dwell at this time very feelingly, and very frequently, upon the wholesome restraint which matrimony imposes upon the possessor of an artistic temperament.</p>
				<p>Stella promised to place my name upon her waiting list, and to take up the matter in due season; and she lamented, with a tiny and pre-meditated yawn, that as a servitor of system she was compelled to list her “little lovers and suitors in alphabetical order, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend. Besides, you would probably strangle me before the year was out.”</p>
				<p>“I would thoroughly enjoy doing it,” I said, grimly, “right now.” She regarded me for a while. “You would, too,” she said at last, with an alien gravity; “and that is why⁠—Oh, Rob dear, you are out of my dimension. I am rather afraid of you. I am a poor bewildered triangle who is being wooed by a cube!” the girl wailed, and but half humorously.</p>
				<p>And I began to plead. It does not matter what I said. It never mattered.</p>
				<p>And persons more sensible than I found then far more important things to talk about, such as General Alger’s inefficiency, and General Shafter’s hammock, and “embalmed beef,” and the folly of taking over the Philippines, and Admiral von Diedrich’s behavior, and the yellow fever in our camps and the comparative claims of <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Sampson and Schley to be made rear-admiral; and everybody more or less was demanding “an investigation,” as the natural aftermath of a war.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>Stella’s mother had closed Bellemeade for the year, however, and they were to spend the winter in Lichfield; and Stella, to reduplicate her phrase, promised to “think it over very seriously.”</p>
				<p>But I suppose I had never any real chance against Peter Blagden. To begin with⁠—though Stella herself, of course, would inherit plenty of money when her mother died⁠—Peter was the only nephew of a childless uncle who was popularly reported to “roll in wealth”; and in addition, Peter was seven years older than I and notoriously dissipated. No other girl of twenty would have hesitated between us half so long as Stella did. She hesitated through a whole winter; and even now there is odd, if scanty, comfort in the fact that Stella hesitated.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Besides Peter was eminently likeable. At times I almost liked him myself, for all my fervent envy of his recognized depravity and of the hateful ease with which he thought of something to say in those uncomfortable moments when he and I and Stella were together. At most other times I could talk glibly enough, but before this seasoned scapegrace I was dumb, and felt my reputation to be hopelessly immaculate⁠ ⁠… If only Stella would believe me to be just the tiniest bit depraved! I blush to think of the dark hints I dropped as to entirely fictitious women who “had been too kind to me. But then”⁠—as I would feelingly lament⁠—“we could never let women alone, we Townsends, you know⁠—”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>One woman at least I was beginning to “let alone,” in that I was writing Bettie Hamlyn letters which grew shorter and shorter.⁠ ⁠… Her mother had fallen ill, not long after I left college; and she and Bettie were now a great way off, in Colorado, where the old lady was dying, with the most selfish sort of laziness about it, and so was involving me in endless correspondence.⁠ ⁠… At least, I wrote to Bettie punctually, if briefly, though I had not seen her since that night when the moon was red, and big, and very evil. I had to do it, because she had insisted that I write.</p>
				<p>“But letters don’t mean anything, Bettie. And besides, I hate writing letters.”</p>
				<p>“That is just why you must write to me regularly. You never do the things you don’t want to do. I know it. But for me you always will, and that makes all the difference.”</p>
				<p>“Shylock!” I retorted.</p>
				<p>“If you like. In any event, I mean to have my pound of flesh, and regularly.”</p>
				<p>So I wrote to Bettie Hamlyn on the seventh of every month⁠—because that was her birthday⁠—and again on the twenty-third, because that was mine. The rest of my time I gave whole-heartedly to Stella.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>They named her Stella, I fancy, because her eyes were so like stars. It is manifestly an irrelevant detail that there do not happen to be any azure stars. Indeed, I am inclined to think that Nature belatedly observed this omission, and created Stella’s eyes to make up for it; at any rate, if you can imagine Aldebaran or Benetnasch polished up a bit and set in a speedwell-cup, you will have a very fair idea of one of them. You cannot, however, picture to yourself the effect of the pair of them, because the human mind is limited.</p>
				<p>Really, though, their effect was curious. You noticed them casually, let us say; then, without warning, you ceased to notice anything. You simply grew foolish and gasped like a newly-hooked trout, and went mad and babbled as meaninglessly as a silly little rustic brook trotting under a bridge.</p>
				<p>I have seen the thing happen any number of times. And, strangely enough, you liked it. Numbers of young men would venture into the same room with those disconcerting eyes the very next evening, even appearing to seek them out and to court peril, as it were⁠—young men who must have known perfectly well, either by report or experience, the unavoidable result of such fool-hardy conduct. For eventually it always culminated in Stella’s being deeply surprised and grieved⁠—at a dance, for choice, with music and color and the unthinking laughter of others to heighten the sadness and the romance of it all⁠—she never having dreamed of such a thing, of course, and having always regarded you only as a dear, dear friend. Yes, and she used certainly to hope that nothing she had said or done could have led you to believe she had even for a moment considered such a thing. Oh, she did it well, did Stella, and endured these frequent griefs and surprises with, I must protest, quite exemplary patience. In a phrase, she was the most adorable combination of the prevaricator, the jilt and the coquette I have ever encountered.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-8" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>So, for the seventh time, I asked Stella to marry me. Nearly every fellow I knew had done as much, particularly Peter Blagden; and it is always a mistake to appear unnecessarily reserved or exclusive. And this time in declining⁠—with a fluency that bespoke considerable practice⁠—she informed me that, as the story books have it, she was shortly to be wedded to another.</p>
				<p>And Peter Blagden clapped the pinnacle upon my anguish by asking me to be the best man. I knew even then whose vanity and whose sense of the appropriate had put him up to it.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“For I haven’t a living male relative of the suitable age except two second cousins that I don’t see much of⁠—praise God!” said Peter, fervently; “and Hugh Van Orden looks about half-past ten, whereas I class John Charteris among the lower orders of vermin.”</p>
				<p>I consented to accept the proffered office and the incidental stick-pin; and was thus enabled to observe from the inside this episode of Stella’s life, and to find it quite like other weddings.</p>
				<p>Something like this:</p>
				<p>“Look here,” a perspiring and fidgety Peter protested, at the last moment, as we lurked in the gloomy vestry with not a drop left in either flask; “look here, Henderson hasn’t blacked the soles of these blessed shoes. I’ll look like an ass when it comes to the kneeling part⁠—like an ass, I tell you! Good heavens, they’ll look like tombstones!”</p>
				<p>“If you funk now,” said I, severely, “I’ll never help you get married again. Oh, sainted Ebenezer in bliss, and whatever have I done with that ring? No, it’s here all right, but you are on the wrong side of me again. And there goes the organ⁠—Good God, Peter, look at her! simply look at her, man! Oh, you lucky devil! you lucky jackass!”</p>
				<p>I spoke enviously, you understand, simply to encourage him.</p>
				<p>Followed a glaring of lights, a swishing of fans, a sense that Peter was not keeping step with me, and the hum of densely packed, expectant humanity; a blare of music; then Stella, an incredible vision with glad, frightened eyes. My shoulders straightened, and I was not out of temper any longer. The organist was playing softly, <i epub:type="se.name.music.song">Oh, Promise Me</i>, and I was thinking of the time, last January, that Stella and I heard The Bostonians, and how funny Henry Clay Barnabee was.⁠ ⁠… “⁠—so long as ye both may live?” ended the bishop.</p>
				<p>“I will,” poor Peter quavered, with obvious uncertainty about it.</p>
				<p>And still one saw in Stella’s eyes unutterable happiness and fear, but her voice was tranquil. I found time to wonder at its steadiness, even though, just about this time, I resonantly burst a button off one of my new gloves. I fancy they must have been rather tight.</p>
				<p>“And thereto,” said Stella, calmly, “I give thee my troth.”</p>
				<p>And subsequently they were Mendelssohned out of church to the satisfaction of a large and critical audience. I came down the aisle with Stella’s only sister⁠—who afterward married the Marquis d’Arlanges⁠—and found Lizzie very entertaining later in the evening.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-9" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>Yes, it was quite like other weddings. I only wonder for what conceivable reason I remember its least detail, and so vividly. For it all happened a great while ago, when⁠—of such flimsy stuff is glory woven⁠—Emilio Aguinaldo and Captain Coghlan were the persons most talked of in America; and when the Mazet committee was “investigating” I forget what, but with column after column about it in the papers every day; and when <i epub:type="se.name.publication.poem">Me und Gott</i> was a famous poem, and “to hobsonize” was the most popular verb; and when I was twenty-one. <i xml:lang="la">Sic transit gloria mundi</i>, as it says in the back of the dictionary.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
