<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI: He Assists in the Diversion of Birds</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Assists in the Diversion of Birds</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-26-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>We met, then, in the clear May morning, with what occult trepidations I cannot say. You may depend upon it, though, we had our emotions.</p>
				<p>And about us, spring was marshaling her pageant, and from divers nooks, the weather-stained nymphs and fauns regarded us in candid, if preoccupied, appraisement; and above us, the clipped ilex trees were about a knowing conference. As for the birds, they were discussing us without any reticence whatever, for, more favoured of chance than imperial Solomon, they have been the confidants in any number of such affairs, and regard the way of a man with a maid as one of the most matter-of-fact occurrences in the world.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúHere is he! here is she!‚Äù they shrilled. ‚ÄúSee how they meet, see how they greet! Ah, sweet, sweet, sweet, to meet in the spring!‚Äù And that we two would immediately set to nest-building, they considered a foregone conclusion.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-26-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>I had taken both her firm, warm hands in salutation, and held them, for a breathing-space, between my own. And my own hands seemed to me two very gross, and hulking, and raw, and red monstrosities, in contrast with their dimpled captives, and my hands appeared, also, to shake unnecessarily.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNow, in a moment,‚Äù said I, ‚ÄúI am going to ask you something very important. But, first, I have a confession to make.‚Äù</p>
				<p>And her glad, shamed eyes bemocked me. ‚ÄúMy lord of Burleigh!‚Äù she softly breathed. ‚ÄúMy liege Cophetua! <em>My</em> king Cophetua! And did you think, then, I was blind?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúEh?‚Äù said I.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAs if I hadn‚Äôt known from the first!‚Äù the girl pouted; ‚Äúas if I hadn‚Äôt known from the very first day when you dropped your cigarette case! Ah, I had heard of you before, Peter!‚ÅÝ‚Äîof Peter, the misogynist, who was ashamed to go a-wooing in his proper guise! Was it because you were afraid I‚Äôd marry you for your money, Peter?‚ÅÝ‚Äîpoor, timid Peter! But, oh, Peter, Peter, what possessed you to take the name of that notorious Robert Townsend?‚Äù she demanded, with uplifted forefinger. ‚ÄúCouldn‚Äôt you think of a better one, Peter?‚ÅÝ‚Äîof a more respectable one, Peter? It really is a great relief to call you Peter at last. I‚Äôve had to try so hard to keep from doing it before, Peter.‚Äù</p>
				<p>And in answer, I made an inarticulate sound.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBut you were so grave about it,‚Äù the girl went on, happily, ‚Äúthat I almost thought you were telling the truth, Peter. Then my maid told me‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI mean, she happened to mention casually that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend‚Äôs valet had described his master to her as an extraordinarily handsome man. So, then, of course, I knew you were Peter Blagden.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI perceive,‚Äù said I, reflectively, ‚Äúthat Byam has been somewhat too zealous. I begin to suspect, also, that kitchen-gossip is a mischancy petard, and rather more than apt to hoist the engineer who employs it. So, you thought I was Peter Blagden‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe rich Peter Blagden? Ah, yes!‚Äù</p>
				<p>Now the birds were caroling on a wager. ‚ÄúAh, sweet! what is sweeter?‚Äù they sang. ‚ÄúAh, sweet, sweet, sweet, to meet in the spring.‚Äù</p>
				<p>But the girl gave a wordless cry at sight of the change in my face. ‚ÄúOh, how dear of you to care so much! I didn‚Äôt mean that you were <em>ugly</em>, Peter. I just meant you are so big and‚ÅÝ‚Äîand so like the baby that they probably have on the talcum-powder boxes in Brobdingnag‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBecause I happen to be really Robert Townsend‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe notorious Robert Etheridge Townsend,‚Äù I continued, with a smile. ‚ÄúI am sorry you were deceived by the cigarette-case. I remember now; I borrowed it from Peter. What I meant to confess was that I have known all along you were Margaret Hugonin.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBut I‚Äôm not,‚Äù the girl said, in bewilderment. ‚ÄúWhy‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWhy I <em>told</em> you I was Avis Beechinor.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThis handkerchief?‚Äù I queried, and took it from my pocket. I had been absurd enough to carry it next to my heart.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh‚ÅÝ‚Äî!‚Äù And now the tension broke, and her voice leapt to high, shrill, half-hysterical speaking.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI am Avis Beechinor. I am a poor relation, a penniless cousin, a dependent, a hanger-on, do you understand? And you‚ÅÝ‚ÄîAh, how‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow funny! Why, Margaret <em>always</em> gives me her cast-off finery, the scraps, the remnants, the clothes she is tired of, the misfit things‚ÅÝ‚Äîso that she won‚Äôt be ashamed of me, so that I may be fairly presentable. She gave me eight of those handkerchiefs. I meant to pick the monograms out with a needle, you understand, because I haven‚Äôt any money to buy such handkerchiefs for myself. I remember now‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe gave them to me on that day‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat first day, and I missed one of them a little later on. Ah, how‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow funny!‚Äù she cried, again; ‚Äúah, how very, very funny! No, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend, I am not an heiress‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm a pauper, a poor relation. No, you have failed again, just as you did with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝBarry-Smith and with Miss Jemmett, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend. I‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI wish you better luck the next time.‚Äù</p>
				<p>I must have raised one hand as though in warding off a physical blow. ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt!‚Äù I said.</p>
				<p>And all the woman in her leapt to defend me. ‚ÄúAh no, ah no!‚Äù she pleaded, and her hands fell caressingly upon my shoulder; and she raised a penitent, tear-stained face toward mine; ‚Äúah no, forgive me! I didn‚Äôt mean that altogether. It is different with a man. Of course, you must marry sensibly‚ÅÝ‚Äîof course you must, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend. It is I who am to blame‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhy, of <em>course</em> it‚Äôs only I who am to blame. I have encouraged you, I know‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúYou haven‚Äôt! you haven‚Äôt‚Äù I barked.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúBut, yes‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor I came back that second day because I thought you were the rich <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBlagden. I was so tired of being poor, so tired of being dependent, that it simply seemed to me I could not stand it for a moment longer. Ah, I tell you, I was tired, tired, tired! I was tired and sick and worn out with it all!‚Äù</p>
				<p>I did not interrupt her. I was nobly moved; but even then at the back of my mind some being that was not I was taking notes as to this girl, so young and desirable, and now so like a plaintive child who has been punished and does not understand exactly why.</p>
				<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend, you don‚Äôt know what it means to a girl to be poor!‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou can‚Äôt ever know, because you are only a man. My mother‚ÅÝ‚Äîah, you don‚Äôt know the life I have led! You don‚Äôt know how I have been hawked about, and set up for inspection by the men who could afford to pay my price, and made to show off my little accomplishments for them, and put through my paces before them like any horse in the market! For we are poor, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTownsend‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe are bleakly, hopelessly poor. We are only hangers-on, you see. And ever since I can remember, she has been telling me I must make a rich marriage‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>must</em> make a rich marriage‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>And the girl‚Äôs voice trailed off into silence, and her eyes closed for a moment, and she swayed a little on her feet, so that I caught her by both arms.</p>
				<p>But, presently, she opened her eyes, with a wearied sigh, and presently the two fortune-hunters stared each other in the face.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAh, sweet! what is sweeter?‚Äù sang the birds. ‚ÄúCan you see, can you see, can you see? It is sweet, sweet, sweet!‚Äù They were extremely gay over it, were the birds.</p>
				<p>After a little, though, I opened my lips, and moistened them two or three times before I spoke. ‚ÄúYes,‚Äù said I, ‚ÄúI think I understand. We have both been hangers-on. But that seems, somehow, a long while ago. Yes, it was a knave who scaled that wall the first time‚ÅÝ‚Äîone who needed and had earned a kicking from here to Aldebaran. But I think that I loved you from the very moment I saw you. Will you marry me, Avis?‚Äù</p>
				<p>And in her face there was a wonderful and tender change. ‚ÄúYou care for me‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust me?‚Äù she breathed.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúJust you,‚Äù I answered, gravely.</p>
				<p>And I saw the start, and the merest ghost of a shiver which shook her body, as she leaned toward me a little, almost in surrender; but, quickly, she laughed.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThat was very gentlemanly in you,‚Äù she said; ‚Äúbut, of course, I understand. Let us part friends, then‚ÅÝ‚ÄîRobert. Even if‚ÅÝ‚Äîif you really cared, we couldn‚Äôt marry. We are too poor.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúToo poor!‚Äù I scoffed‚ÅÝ‚Äîand my voice was joyous, for I knew now that it was I she loved and not just Peter Blagden‚Äôs money; ‚Äútoo <em>poor</em>, Avis! I am to the contrary, an inordinately rich man, I tell you, for I have your love. Oh you needn‚Äôt try to deny it. You are heels over head in love with me. And we have made, no doubt, an unsavoury mess of the past; but the future remains to us. We are the earthen pots, you and I, who wanted to swim with the brazen ones. Well! they haven‚Äôt quite smashed us, these big, stupid, brazen pots, but they have shown us that they have the power to do it. And so we are going back where we belong‚ÅÝ‚Äîto the poor man‚Äôs country, Avis‚ÅÝ‚Äîor, in any event, to the country of those God-fearing, sober and honest folk who earn their bread and, just occasionally, a pat of butter to season it.‚Äù</p>
				<p>The world was very beautiful. I knew that I was excellent throughout and unconquerable. So I moved more near to her.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúFor you will come with me, won‚Äôt you, dear? Oh, you won‚Äôt have quite so many gowns in this new country, Avis, and, may be, not even a horse and surrey of your own; but you will have love, and you will have happiness, and, best of all, Avis, you will give a certain very undeserving man his chance‚ÅÝ‚Äîhis one sole chance‚ÅÝ‚Äîto lead a real man‚Äôs life. Are you going to deny him that chance, Avis?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Her gaze read me through and through; and I bore myself a bit proudly under it; and it seemed to me that my heart was filled with love of her, and that some sort of newborn manhood in Robert Etheridge Townsend was enabling me to meet her big brown eyes unflinchingly.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúIt wouldn‚Äôt be sensible,‚Äù she wavered.</p>
				<p>I laughed at that. ‚ÄúSensible! If there is one thing more absurd than another in this very absurd world, it is common sense. Be sensible and you will be miserable, Avis, not to mention being disliked. Sensible! Why, of course, it is not sensible. It is stark, rank, staring idiocy for us two not to make a profitable investment of, we will say, our natural endowments, when we come to marry. For what will <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝGrundy say if we don‚Äôt? Ah, what will she say, indeed? Avis, just between you and me, I do not care a double-blank domino what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝGrundy says. You will obligingly remember that the car for the Hesperides is in the rear, and that this is the third and last call. And in consequence‚ÅÝ‚Äîwill you marry me, Avis?‚Äù</p>
				<p>She gave me her hand frankly, as a man might have done. ‚ÄúYes, Robert,‚Äù said Miss Beechinor, ‚Äúand God helping us, we will make something better of the future than we have of the past.‚Äù</p>
				<p>In the silence that fell, one might hear the birds. ‚ÄúSweet, sweet, sweet!‚Äù they twittered. ‚ÄúCan you see, can you see, can you see? Their lips meet. It is sweet, sweet, sweet!‚Äù</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-26-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>But, by and by, she questioned me. ‚ÄúAre you sure‚ÅÝ‚Äîquite sure,‚Äù she queried, wistfully, ‚Äúthat you wouldn‚Äôt rather have me Margaret Hugonin, the heiress?‚Äù</p>
				<p>I raised a deprecatory hand. ‚ÄúAvis!‚Äù I reproached her; ‚ÄúAvis, Avis, how little you know me! That was the solitary fly in the amber‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat I thought I was to marry a woman named Margaret. For I am something of a connoisseur in nomenclature, and Margaret has always‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>always</em>‚ÅÝ‚Äîbeen my pet detestation in the way of names.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, what a child you are!‚Äù she said.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
