<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<p style="margin-top: 4em">20.</p>
			<p>
				<i>He Dines Out, Impeded by Superstitions</i>
			</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">Within the week I had repented of what I termed my idiotic quixotism, and for precisely nine days after that I cursed my folly. And then, at the Provises, I comprehended that in breaking off my engagement to Rosalind Jemmett I had acted with profound wisdom, and I unfolded my napkin, and said:</p>
			<p>“Do you know I didn’t catch your name⁠—not even this time?”</p>
			<p>She took a liberal supply of lemon juice. “How delightful!” she murmured, “for I heard yours quite distinctly, and these oysters are delicious.”</p>
			<p>I noted with approval that her gown was pink and fluffy; it had also the advantage of displaying shoulders that were incredibly white, and a throat which was little short of marvellous. “I am glad,” I whispered, confidentially, “that you are still wearing that faint vein about your left temple. I thought it admirable for early morning wear upon the house tops of Liege, but it seems equally effective for dinner parties.”</p>
			<p>She raised her eyebrows slightly and selected a biscuit.</p>
			<p>“You see,” said I, “I was horribly late. And when Kittie Provis said, ‘Allow me,’ and I saw⁠—well, I didn’t care,” I concluded, lucidly, “because to have every one of your dreams come true, all of a sudden, leaves you past caring.”</p>
			<p>“It really is funny,” she confided to a spoonful of <i>consomme a la<br/>
			Julienne</i>.<br/></p>
			<p>“After almost two years!” sighed I, ever so happily. But I continued, with reproach, “To go without a word⁠—that very day⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Mamma⁠—” she began.</p>
			<p>I recalled the canary-bird, and the purple shawl. “I sought wildly,” said I; “you were evanished. The <i>proprietaire</i> was tearing his hair⁠—no insurance⁠—he knew nothing. So I too tore my hair; and I said things. There was a row. For he also said things: ‘Figure to yourselves, messieurs! I lose the Continental⁠—two ladies come and go, I know not who⁠—I am ruined, desolated, is it not?⁠—and this pig of an American blusters⁠—ah, my new carpets, just down, what horror!’ And then, you know, he launched into a quite feeling peroration concerning our notorious custom of tomahawking one another⁠—</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I coldly concluded into <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Clement Dumby’s ear, “we all behaved disgracefully. As you very justly observe, liquor has been the curse of the South.” It was of a piece with Kittie Provis to put me next to Aunt Marcia, I reflected.</p>
			<p>And mentally I decided that even though a portion of my assertions had not actually gone through the formality of occurring, it all might very easily have happened, had I remained a while longer in Liege; and then ensued a silent interval and an entree.</p>
			<p>“And so⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“And so I knocked about the world, in various places, hoping against hope that at last⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Your voice carries frightfully⁠—”</p>
			<p>I glanced toward <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Clement Dumby, who, as a dining dowager of many years’ experience, was, to all appearances, engrossed by the contents of her plate. “My elderly neighbour is as hard of hearing as a telephone-girl,” I announced. She was the exact contrary, which was why I said it quite audibly. “And your neighbour⁠—why, <i>his</i> neighbour is Nannie Allsotts. We might as well be on a desert island, Elena⁠—” And the given name slipped out so carelessly as to appear almost accidental.</p>
			<p>“Sir!” said she, with proper indignation; “after so short an acquaintance⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Centuries,” I suggested, meekly. “You remember I explained about that.”</p>
			<p>She frowned⁠—an untrustworthy frown that was tinged with laughter. “One meets so many people! Yes, it really is frightfully warm, Colonel Grimshaw; they ought to open some of the windows.”</p>
			<p>“Er⁠—haw⁠—hum! Didn’t see you at the Anchesters.”</p>
			<p>“No; I am usually lucky enough to be in bed with a sick headache when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Anchester entertains. Of two evils one should choose the lesser, you know.”</p>
			<p>In the manner of divers veterans Colonel Grimshaw evinced his mirth upon a scale more proper to an elephant; and relapsed, with a reassuring air of having done his duty once and for all.</p>
			<p>“I never,” she suggested, tentatively, “heard any more of your poem, about⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I finished it; every magazine in the country knows it. It is poor stuff, of course, but then how could I write of Helen when Helen had disappeared?”</p>
			<p>The lashes exhibited themselves at full length. “I looked her up,” confessed their owner, guiltily, “in the encyclopaedia. It was very instructive⁠—about sun-myths and bronzes and the growth of the epic, you know, and tree-worship and moon-goddesses. Of course”⁠—here ensued a flush and a certain hiatus in logic⁠—“of course it is nonsense.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense?” My voice sank tenderly. “Is it nonsense, Elena, that for two years I have remembered the woman whose soft body I held, for one unforgettable moment, in my arms? and nonsense that I have fought all this time against⁠—against the temptations every man has⁠—that I might ask her at last⁠—some day when she at last returned, as always I knew she would⁠—to share a fairly decent life? and nonsense that I have dreamed, waking and sleeping, of a wondrous face I knew in Ilium first, and in old Rome, and later on in France, I think, when the Valois were kings? Well!” I sighed, after vainly racking my brain for a tenderer fragment of those two-year-old verses, “I suppose it is nonsense!”</p>
			<p>“The salt, please,” quoth she. She flashed that unforgotten broadside at me. “I believe you need it.”</p>
			<p>“Why, dear me! of course not!” said I, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dumby; “immorality lost the true <i>cachet</i> about the same time that ping-pong did. Nowadays divorces are going out, you know, and divorcees are not allowed to. Quite modish women are seen in public with their husbands nowadays.”</p>
			<p>“H’mph!” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dumby; “I’ve no doubt that you must find it a most inconvenient fad!”</p>
			<p>I ate my portion of duck abstractedly. “Thus to dive into the refuse-heap of last year’s slang does not quite cover the requirements of the case. For I wish⁠—only I hardly dare to ask⁠—”</p>
			<p>“If I were half of what you make out,” meditatively said she, “I would be a regular fairy, and couldn’t refuse you the usual three wishes.”</p>
			<p>“Two,” I declared, “would be sufficient.”</p>
			<p>“First?”</p>
			<p>“That you tell me your name.”</p>
			<p>“I adore orange ices, don’t you? And the second?” was her comment.</p>
			<p>“Well, then, you’ re a pig,” was mine. “You are simply a nomenclatural Berkshire. But the second is that you let me measure your finger⁠—oh, any finger will do. Say, the third on the left hand.”</p>
			<p>“You really talk to me as if⁠—” But this non-existent state of affairs proved indescribable, and the unreal condition lapsed into a pout.</p>
			<p>“Oh, very possibly!” I conceded; “since the way in which a man talks to a woman⁠—to <i>the</i> woman⁠—depends by ordinary upon the depth⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The depth of his devotion?” she queried, helpfully. “Of course!”</p>
			<p>I faced the broadside, without flinching. “No,” said I, critically; “the depth of her dimples.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense!” Nevertheless, the dimples were, and by a deal, the more conspicuous. We were getting on pretty well.</p>
			<p>I bent forward; there was a little catch in my voice. Aunt Marcia was listening. I wanted her to listen.</p>
			<p>“You must know that I love you,” I said, simply, “I have always loved you, I think, since the moment my eyes first fell upon you in that⁠—other pink thing. Of course, I realize the absurdity of my talking in this way to a woman whose name I don’t know; but I realise more strongly that I love you. Why, there is not a pulse in my body which isn’t throbbing and tingling and leaping riotously from pure joy of being with you again, Elena! And in time, you will love me a little, simply because I want you to⁠—isn’t that always a woman’s main reason for caring for a man?”</p>
			<p>She considered this, dubious and flushed.</p>
			<p>“I will not insist,” said I, with a hurried and contented laugh, “that you were formerly an Argive queen. I mean I will not be obstinate about it, because that, I confess, was a paraphrase of my verses. But Helen has always been to me the symbol of perfect loveliness, and so it was not unnatural that I should confuse you with her.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir,” said she, demurely.</p>
			<p>“I half believe it is true, even now; and if not⁠—well, Helen was acceptable enough in her day, Elena, but I am willing to Italianise, for I have seen you and loved you, and Helen is forgot. It is not exactly the orthodox pace for falling in love,” I added, with a boyish candour, “but it is very real to me.”</p>
			<p>“You⁠—you couldn’t have fallen in love⁠—really⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It was not in the least difficult,” I protested.</p>
			<p>“And you don’t even know my <i>name</i>⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I know, however, what it is going to be,” said I; “and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> ’Enry ’Awkins, as we’ll put it, has found favour in the judgment of connoisseurs. So after dinner⁠—in an hour⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, very well! since you’re an author and insist, I will be ready, in an hour, to decline you, with thanks.”</p>
			<p>“Rejection not implying any lack of merit,” I suggested. “This is damnable iteration; but I am accustomed to it.”</p>
			<p>But by this, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Provis was gathering eyes around the table, and her guests arose, with the usual outburst of conversation, and swishing of dresses, and the not always unpremeditated dropping of handkerchiefs and fans. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Clement Dumby bore down upon us now, a determined and generously proportioned figure in her notorious black silk.</p>
			<p>“Really,” said she, aggressively, “I never saw two people more engrossed. My dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barry-Smith, you have been so taken up with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, all during dinner, that I haven’t had a chance to welcome you to Lichfield. Your mother and I were at school together, you know. And your husband was quite a beau of mine. So I don’t feel, now, at all as if we were strangers⁠—”</p>
			<p>And thus she bore Elena off, and I knew that within ten minutes Elena would have been warned against me, as “not quite a desirable acquaintance, you know, my dear, and it is only my duty to tell you that as a young and attractive married woman⁠—”</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">2</p>
			<p>“And so,” I said in my soul, as the men redistributed themselves, “she is married⁠—married while you were pottering with books and the turn of phrases and immortality and such trifles⁠—oh, you ass! And to a man named Barry-Smith⁠—damn him, I wonder whether he is the hungry scut that hasn’t had his hair cut this fall, or the blancmange-bellied one with the mashed-strawberry nose? Yes, I know everybody else. And Jimmy Travis is telling a funny story, so <i>laugh</i>! People will think you are grieving over Rosalind.⁠ ⁠… But why in heaven’s name isn’t Jimmy at home this very moment⁠—with a wife and carpet-slippers and a large-size bottle of paregoric on his mantelpiece⁠—instead of here, grinning like a fool over some blatant indecency? He ought to marry; every young man ought to marry. Oh, you futile, abject, burbling twin-brother of the first patron that procured a reputation for Bedlam! why aren’t <i>you</i> married⁠—married years ago⁠—with a home of your own, and a victoria for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Townsend and bills from the kindergarten every quarter? Oh, you bartender of verbal cocktails! I believe your worst enemy flung your mind at you in a moment of unbridled hatred.”</p>
			<p>So I snapped the stem of my glass carefully, and scowled with morose disapproval at the unconscious <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Travis, and his now-applauded and very Fescennine jest.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">3</p>
			<p>I found her inspecting a bulky folio with remarkable interest. There was a lamp, with a red shade, that cast a glow over her, such as one sometimes sees reflected from a great fire. The people about us were chattering idiotically, and something inside my throat prevented my breathing properly, and I was miserable.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barry-Smith,”⁠—thus I began⁠—“if you’ve the tiniest scrap of pity in your heart for a very presumptuous, blundering and unhappy person, I pray you to forgive and to forget, as people say, all that I have blatted out to you. I spoke, as I thought, to a free woman, who had the right to listen to my boyish talk, even though she might elect to laugh at it. And now I hardly dare to ask forgiveness.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barry-Smith inspected a view of the Matterhorn, with careful deliberation. “Forgiveness?” said she.</p>
			<p>“Indeed,” said I, “I <i>don’t</i> deserve it.” And I smiled most resolutely.<br/>
			“I had always known that somewhere, somehow, you would come into my life<br/>
			again. It has been my dream all these two years; but I dream carelessly.<br/>
			My visions had not included this⁠—obstacle.”<br/></p>
			<p>She made wide eyes at me. “What?” said she.</p>
			<p>“Your husband,” I suggested, delicately.</p>
			<p>The eyes flashed. And a view of Monaco, to all appearances, awoke some pleasing recollection. “I confess,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barry-Smith, “that⁠—for the time⁠—I had quite forgotten him. I⁠—I reckon you must think me very horrid?”</p>
			<p>But she was at pains to accompany this query with a broadside that rendered such a supposition most unthinkable. And so⁠—</p>
			<p>“I think you⁠—” My speech was hushed and breathless, and ended in a click of the teeth. “Oh, don’t let’s go into the minor details,” I pleaded.</p>
			<p>Then <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barry-Smith descended to a truism. “It is usually better not to,” said she, with the air of an authority. And latterly, addressing the facade of Notre Dame, “You see, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barry-Smith being so much older than I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I would prefer that. Of course, though, it is none of my business.”</p>
			<p>“You see, you came and went so suddenly that⁠—of course I never thought to see you again⁠—not that I ever thought about it, I reckon⁠—” Her candour would have been cruel had it not been reassuringly over-emphasized. “And <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barry-Smith was very pressing⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He would be,” I assented, after consideration. “It is, indeed, the single point in his outrageous conduct I am willing to condone.”</p>
			<p>“⁠—and he was a great friend of my father’s, and I <i>liked</i> him⁠—”</p>
			<p>“So you married him and lived together ever afterward, without ever throwing the tureen at each other. That is the most modern version; but there is usually a footnote concerning the bread-and-butter plates.”</p>
			<p>She smiled, inscrutably, a sphinx in Dresden china. “And yet,” she murmured, plaintively, “I <i>would</i> like to know what you think of me.”</p>
			<p>“Why, prefacing with the announcement that I pray God I may never see you after to-night, I think you the most adorable creature He ever made. What does it matter now? I have lost you. I think⁠—ah, desire o’ the world, what can I think of you? The notion of you dazzles me like flame⁠—and I dare not think of you, for I love you.”</p>
			<p>“Yes?” she queried, sweetly; “then I reckon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dumby was right after all. She said you were a most depraved person and that, as a young and⁠—well, <i>she</i> said it, you know⁠—attractive widow⁠—”</p>
			<p>“H’m!” said I; and I sat down. “Elena Barry-Smith,” I added, “you are an unmitigated and unconscionable and unpardonable rascal. There is just one punishment which would be adequate to meet your case; and I warn you that I mean to inflict it. Why, how dare you be a widow! The court decides it is unable to put up with any such nonsense, and that you’ve got to stop it at once.”</p>
			<p>“Really,” said she, tossing her head and moving swiftly, “one would think we <i>were</i> on a desert island!”</p>
			<p>“Or a strange roof”⁠—and I laughed, contentedly. “Meanwhile, about that ring⁠—it should be, I think, a heavy, Byzantine ring, with the stones sunk deep in the dull gold. Yes, we’ll have six stones in it; say, R, a ruby; O, an opal; B, a beryl; E, an emerald; R, a ruby again, I suppose; and T, a topaz. Elena, that’s the very ring I mean to buy as soon as I’ve had breakfast, tomorrow, as a token of my mortgage on the desire of the world, and as the badge of your impendent slavery.” And I reflected that Rosalind had, after all, behaved commendably in humiliating me by so promptly returning this ring.</p>
			<p>Very calmly Elena Barry-Smith regarded the Bay of Naples; very calmly she turned to the Taj Mahal. “An obese young Lochinvar,” she reflected aloud, “who has seen me twice, unblushingly assumes he is about to marry me! Of course,” she sighed, quite tolerantly, “I know he is clean out of his head, for otherwise⁠—” “Yes⁠—otherwise?” I prompted.</p>
			<p>“⁠—he would never ask me to wear an opal. Why,” she cried in horror, “I couldn’t think of it!” “You mean⁠—?” said I.</p>
			<p>She closed the album, with firmness. “Why, you are just a child,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barry-Smith. “We are utter strangers to each other. Please remember that, for all you know, I may have an unbridled temper, or an imported complexion, or a liking for old man Ibsen. What you ask⁠—only you don’t, you simply assume it⁠—is preposterous. And besides, opals <i>are</i> unlucky.”</p>
			<p>“Desire o’ the world,” I said, in dolorous wise, “I have just remembered the black-lace mitts and reticule you left upon the dinner-table. Oh, truly, I had meant to bring ’em to you⁠—Only <i>do</i> you think it quite good form to put on those cloth-sided shoes when you’ve been invited to a real party?”</p>
			<p>For a moment <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barry-Smith regarded me critically. Then she shook her head, and tried to frown, and reopened the album, and inspected the crater of Vesuvius, and quite frankly laughed. And a tender, pink-tipped hand rested upon my arm for an instant⁠—a brief instant, yet pulsing with a sense of many lights and of music playing somewhere, and of a man’s heart keeping time to it.</p>
			<p>“If you were to make it an onyx⁠—” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barry-Smith.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
