<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<p style="margin-top: 4em">14.</p>
			<p>
				<i>He Participates in a Brave Jest</i>
			</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">Stella drove on fine afternoons, under the protection of a trim and preternaturally grave tiger. The next afternoon, by a Lichfieldian transition, was irreproachable. I was to remember, afterward, wondering in a vague fashion, as the equipage passed, if the boy’s lot was not rather enviable. There might well be less attractive methods of earning the daily bread and butter than to whirl through life behind Stella. One would rarely see her face, of course, but there would be such compensations as an unfailing sense of her presence, and the faint odour of her hair at times and, always, blown scraps of her laughter or shreds of her talk, and, almost always, the piping of the sweet voice that was stilled so rarely.</p>
			<p>Perhaps the conscienceless tiger listened when she was “seeing the proper people were treated properly”? Yes, one would. Perhaps he ground his teeth? Well, one would, I suspected. And perhaps⁠—?</p>
			<p>There was a nod of recognition from Stella; and I lifted my hat as they bowled by toward the Reservoir. I went down Regis Avenue, mildly resentful that she had not offered me a lift.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">2</p>
			<p>A vagrant puff of wind was abroad in the Boulevard that afternoon. It paused for a while to amuse itself with a stray bit of paper. Presently the wind grew tired of this plaything and tossed between the eyes of a sorrel horse. Prince lurched and bolted; and Rex, always a vicious brute, followed his mate. One fancies the vagabond wind must have laughed over that which ensued.</p>
			<p>After a moment it returned and lifted a bit of paper from the roadway, with a new respect, perhaps, and the two of them frolicked away over close-shaven turf. It was a merry game they played there in the spring sunlight. The paper fluttered a little, whirled over and over, and scuttled off through the grass; with a gust of mirth, the wind was after it, now gained upon it, now lost ground in eddying about a tree, and now made up the disadvantage in the open, and at last chuckled over its playmate pinned to the earth and flapping in sharp, indignant remonstrances. Then <i>da capo</i>.</p>
			<p>It was a merry game that lasted till the angry sunset had flashed its final palpitant lance through the treetrunks farther down the roadway. There were gaping people in this place, and broken wheels and shafts, and a policeman with a smoking pistol, and two dead horses, and a horrible looking dead boy in yellow-topped boots. Somebody had charitably covered his face with a handkerchief; and men were lifting a limp, white heap from among the splintered rubbish.</p>
			<p>Then wind and paper played half-heartedly in the twilight until the night had grown too chilly for further sport. There was no more murder to be done; and so the vagabond wind was puffed out into nothingness, and the bit of paper was left alone, and at about this season the big stars⁠—the incurious stars⁠—peeped out of heaven, one by one.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">3</p>
			<p>It was Stella’s sister, the Marquise d’Arlanges, who sent for me that night. Across the street a hand-organ ground out its jingling tune as Lizzie’s note told me what the playful wind had brought about. It was a despairing, hopeless and insistent air that shrilled and piped across the way. It seemed very appropriate.</p>
			<p>The doctors feared⁠—Ah, well, telegrams had failed to reach Peter in<br/>
			Washington. Peter Blagden was not in Washington, he had not been in<br/>
			Washington. He could not be found. And did I think⁠—?<br/></p>
			<p>No, I thought none of the things that Stella’s sister suggested. Of a sudden I knew. I stood silent for a little and heard that damned, clutching tune cough and choke and end; I heard the renewed babblement of children; and I heard the organ clatter down the street, and set up its faint jingling in the distance. And I knew with an unreasoning surety. I pitied Stella now ineffably, not for the maiming and crippling of her body, for the spoiling of that tender miracle, that white flower of flesh, but for the falling of her air-castle, the brave air-castle which to her meant everything. I guessed what had happened.</p>
			<p>Later I found Peter Blagden, no matter where. It is not particularly to my credit that I knew where to look for him. Yet the French have a saying of infinite wisdom in their <i>qui a bu boira</i>. The old vice had gripped the man, irresistibly, and he had stolen off to gratify it in secret; and he had not been sober for a week. He was on the verge of collapse even when I told him⁠—oh, with a deliberate cruelty, I grant you⁠—what had happened that afternoon.</p>
			<p>Then, swiftly, his demolishment came; and I could not⁠—could not for very shame⁠—bring this shivering, weeping imbecile to the bedside of Stella, who was perhaps to die that night. Such was the news I brought to Stella’s sister; through desolate streets already blanching in the dawn.</p>
			<p>Stella was calling for Peter. We manufactured explanations.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">4</p>
			<p>Nice customs curtsey to death. I am standing at Stella’s bedside, and the white-capped nurse has gone. There are dim lights about the room, and heavy carts lumber by in the dawn without. A petulant sparrow is cheeping somewhere.</p>
			<p>“Tell me the truth,” says Stella, pleadingly. Her face, showing over billows of bedclothes, is as pale as they. But beautiful, and exceedingly beautiful, is Stella’s face, now that she is come to die.</p>
			<p>It heartened me to lie to her. Peter had been retained in the great Western Railway case. He had been called to Denver, San Francisco and⁠—I forget today just why or even whither. He had kept it as a surprise for her. He was hurrying back. He would arrive in two days. I showed her telegrams from Peter Blagden⁠—clumsy forgeries I had concocted in the last half-hour.</p>
			<p>Oh, the story ran lamely, I grant you. But, vanity apart, I told it with conviction. Stella must and should die in content; that much at least I could purchase for her; and my thoughts were strangely nimble, there was a devilish fluency in my speech, and lie after lie was fitted somehow into an entity that surprised even me as it took plausible form. And I got my reward. Little by little, the doubt died from her eyes as I lied stubbornly in a drug-scented silence; a little by a little, her cheeks flushed brighter, and ever brighter, as I dilated on this wonderful success that had come to Peter Blagden, till at last her face was all aflame with happiness.</p>
			<p>She had dreamed of this, half conscious of her folly; she had worked toward this consummation for months. But she had hardly dared to hope for absolute success; it almost worried her; and she could not be certain, even now, whether it was the soup or her blue silk that had influenced Allardyce most potently. Both had been planned to wheedle him, to gain this glorious chance for Peter Blagden.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“You⁠—you are sure you are not lying?” said Stella, and smiled in speaking, for she believed me infinitely.</p>
			<p>“Stella, before God, it is true!” I said, with fervour. “On my word of honour, it is as I tell you!” And my heart was sick within me as I thought of the stuttering brute, the painted female thing with tumbled hair, and the stench of liquor in the room⁠—Ah, well, the God I called to witness strengthened me to smile back at Stella.</p>
			<p>“I believe you,” she said, simply. “I⁠—I am glad. It is a big thing for Peter.” Her eyes widened in wonder and pride, and she dreamed for just a moment of his future. But, upon a sudden, her face fell. “Dear, dear!” said Stella, petulantly; “I’d forgotten. I’ll be dead by then.”</p>
			<p>“Stella! Stella!” I cried, and very hoarsely; “why⁠—why, nonsense, child! The doctor thinks⁠—he is quite sure, I mean⁠—” I had a horrible desire to laugh. Heine was right; there is an Aristophanes in heaven.</p>
			<p>“Ah, I know,” she interrupted. “I am a little afraid to die,” she went on, reflectively. “If one only knew⁠—” Stella paused for a moment; then she smiled. “After all,” she said, “it isn’t as if I hadn’t accomplished anything. I have made Peter. The ball is at his feet now; he has only to kick it. And I helped.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said I. My voice was shaken, broken out of all control. “You have helped. Why, you have done everything, Stella! There is not a young man in America with his prospects. In five years, he will be one of our greatest lawyers⁠—everybody says so⁠—everybody! And you have done it all, Stella⁠—every bit of it! You have made a man of him, I tell you! Look at what he was!⁠—and then look at what he is! And⁠—and you talk of leaving him now! Why, it’s preposterous! Peter needs you, I tell you⁠—he needs you to cajole the proper people and keep him steady and⁠—and⁠—Why, you artful young woman, how could he possibly get on without you, do you think? Oh, how can any of us get on without you? You <i>must</i> get well, I tell you. In a month, you will be right as a trivet. You die! Why, nonsense!” I laughed. I feared I would never have done with laughter over the idea of Stella’s dying.</p>
			<p>“But I have done all I could. And so he doesn’t need me now.” Stella meditated for yet another moment. “I believe I shall always know when he does anything especially big. God would be sure to tell me, you see, because He understands how much it means to me. And I shall be proud⁠—ah, yes, wherever I am, I shall be proud of Peter. You see, he didn’t really care about being a success, for of course he knows that Uncle Larry will leave him a great deal of money one of these days. But I am such a vain little cat⁠—so bent on making a noise in the world⁠—that, I think, he did it more to please my vanity than anything else. I nagged him, frightfully, you know,” Stella confessed, “but he was always⁠—oh, <i>so</i> dear about it, Rob! And he has never failed me⁠—not even once, although I know at times it has been very hard for him.” Stella sighed; and then laughed. “Yes,” said she, “I think I am satisfied with my life altogether. Somehow, I am sure I shall be told about it when he is a power in the world⁠—a power for good, as he will be⁠—and then I shall be very perky⁠—somewhere. I ought to sing <i>Nunc Dimittis</i>, oughtn’t I?” I was not unmoved; nor did it ever lie within my power to be unmoved when I thought of Stella and how gaily she went to meet her death.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">5</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">“Good-bye,” said she, in a tired voice.</p>
			<p>“Good-bye, Stella,” said I; and I kissed her.</p>
			<p>“And I don’t think you are a mess. And I <i>don’t</i> hate you.” She was smiling very strangely. “Yes, I remember that first time. And no matter what they said, I always cared heaps more about you, Rob, than I dared let you know. And if only you had been as dependable as Peter⁠—But, you see, you weren’t⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No, dear, you did the right thing⁠—what was best for all of us⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Then don’t mind so much. Oh, Bob, it hurts me to see you mind so much! You aren’t⁠—being dependable, like Peter, even now,” she said, reproachfully.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Heine was right; there is an Aristophanes in heaven.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
