<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Reconciles Sentiment and Reason</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-24-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>So I regarded her for a rather lengthy interval, considering meanwhile, with an immeasurable content how utterly and entirely impossible it would always be to describe her.</p>
				<p>Clearly, it would be out of the question to trust to words, however choicely picked, for, upon inspection, there was a delightful ambiguity about every one of this girl’s features that defied such idiotic makeshifts. Her eyes, for example, I noted with a faint thrill of surprise, just escaped being brown by virtue of an amber glow they had; what colour, then, was I conscientiously to call them?</p>
				<p>And her hair I found a bewildering, though pleasing, mesh of shadow and sunlight, all made up of multitudinous graduations of some anonymous colour that seemed to vary with the light you chanced to see it in, through the whole gamut of bronze and chestnut and gold; and where, pray, in the bulkiest lexicon, in the very weightiest thesaurus, was I to find the adjective which could, if but in desperation, be applied to hair like that without trenching on sacrilege?⁠ ⁠… For it was spring, you must remember, and I was twenty-five.</p>
				<p>So that in my appraisal, you may depend upon it, her lips were quickly passed over as a dangerous topic, and were dismissed with the mental statement that they were red and not altogether unattractive. Whereas her cheeks baffled me for a time⁠—but always with a haunting sense of familiarity⁠—till I had, at last, discovered they reminded me of those little tatters of cloud that sometimes float about the setting sun⁠—those irresolute wisps which cannot quite decide whether to be pink or white, and waver through their tiny lives between the two colours.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>To this effect, then, I discoursed with my soul, what time I sat upon the wall-top and smiled and kicked my heels to and fro among the ivy. By and by, though, the girl sighed.</p>
				<p>“You are placing me in an extremely unpleasant position,” she complained, as if wearily. “Would you mind returning to your sanatorium and allowing me to go on reading? For I am interested in my book, and I can’t possibly go on in any comfort so long as you elect to perch up there like Humpty-Dumpty, and grin like seven dozen Cheshire cats.”</p>
				<p>“Now, that,” I spoke, in absent wise, “is but another instance of the widely prevalent desire to have me serve as scapegoat for the sins of all humanity. I am being blamed now for sitting on top of this wall. One would think I wanted to sit here. One would actually think,” I cried, and raised my eyes to heaven, “that sitting on the very humpiest kind of iron spikes was my favorite form of recreation! No⁠—in the interests of justice,” I continued, and fell into a milder tone, “I must ask you to place the blame where it more rightfully belongs. The injuries which are within the moment being inflicted on my sensitive nature, and, incidentally, upon my not overstocked wardrobe, I am willing to pass over. But the claims of justice are everywhere paramount. Miss Hugonin, and Miss Hugonin alone, is responsible for my present emulation of Mohammed’s coffin, and upon that responsibility I am compelled to insist.”</p>
				<p>“May one suggest,” she queried gently, “that you are probably⁠—mistaken?”</p>
				<p>I sketched a bow. “Recognising your present point of view,” said I, gallantly, “I thank you for the kindly euphemism. But may one allowably demonstrate the fallacy of this same point of view? I thank you: for silence, I am told, is proverbially equal to assent. I am, then, one Robert Townsend, by birth a gentleman, by courtesy an author, by inclination an idler, and by lucky chance a guest of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Peter Blagden, whose flourishing estate extends indefinitely yonder to the rear of my coat-tails. My hobby chances to be gardening. I am a connoisseur, an admirer, a devotee of gardens. It is, indeed, hereditary among the Townsends; a love for gardens runs in our family just as a love for gin runs in less favoured races. It is with us an irresistible passion. The very founder of our family⁠—one Adam, whom you may have heard of⁠—was a gardener. Owing to the unfortunate loss of his position, the family since then has sunken somewhat in the world; but time and poverty alike have proven powerless against our horticultural tastes and botanical inclinations. And then,” cried I, with a flourish, “and then, what follows logically?”</p>
				<p>“Why, if you are not more careful,” she languidly made answer, “I am afraid that, owing to the laws of gravitation, a broken neck is what follows logically.”</p>
				<p>“You are a rogue,” I commented, in my soul, “and I like you all the better for it.”</p>
				<p>Aloud, I stated: “What follows is that we can no more keep away from a creditable sort of garden than a moth can from a lighted candle. Consider, then, my position. Here am I on one side of the wall, and with my peach-tree, to be sure⁠—but on the other side is one of the most famous masterpieces of formal gardening in the whole country. Am I to blame if I succumb to the temptation? Surely not,” I argued; “for surely to any fair-minded person it will be at once apparent that I am brought to my present very uncomfortable position upon the points of these very humpy iron spikes by a simple combination of atavism and injustice⁠—atavism because hereditary inclination draws me irresistibly to the top of the wall, and injustice because Miss Hugonin’s perfectly unreasonable refusal to admit visitors prevents my coming any farther. Surely, that is at once apparent?”</p>
				<p>But now the girl yielded to my grave face, and broke into a clear, rippling carol of mirth. She laughed from the chest, this woman. And perched in insecure discomfort on my wall, I found time to rejoice that I had finally discovered that rarity of rarities, a woman who neither giggles nor cackles, but has found the happy mean between these two abominations, and knows how to laugh.</p>
				<p>“I have heard of you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend,” she said at last. “Oh, yes, I have heard a deal of you. And I remember now that I never heard you were suspected of sanity.”</p>
				<p>“Common-sense,” I informed her, from my pedestal, “is confined to that decorous class of people who never lose either their tempers or their umbrellas. Now, I haven’t any temper to speak of⁠—or not at least in the presence of ladies⁠—and, so far, I have managed to avoid laying aside anything whatever for a rainy day; so that it stands to reason I must possess uncommon sense.”</p>
				<p>“If that is the case,” said the girl “you will kindly come down from that wall and attempt to behave like a rational being.”</p>
				<p>I was down⁠—as the phrase runs⁠—in the twinkling of a bed-post. On which side of the wall, I leave you to imagine.</p>
				<p>“⁠—For I am sure,” the girl continued, “that I⁠—that Margaret, I should say⁠—would not object in the least to your seeing the gardens, since they interest you so tremendously. I’m Avis Beechinor, you know⁠—Miss Hugonin’s cousin. So, if you like, we will consider that a proper introduction, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, and I will show you the gardens, if⁠—if you really care to see them.”</p>
				<p>My face, I must confess, had fallen slightly. Up to this moment, I had not a suspicion but that it was Miss Hugonin I was talking to: and I now reconsidered, with celerity, the information Byam had brought me from Selwoode.</p>
				<p>“For, when I come to think of it,” I reflected, “he simply said she was older than Miss Hugonin. I embroidered the tale so glibly for Peter’s benefit that I was deceived by my own ornamentations. I had looked for corkscrew ringlets and false teeth a-gleam like a new bath-tub in Miss Hugonin’s cousin⁠—not an absolutely, supremely, inexpressibly unthinkable beauty like this!” I cried, in my soul. “Older! Why, good Lord, Miss Hugonin must be an infant in arms!”</p>
				<p>But my audible discourse was prefaced with an eloquent gesture. “If I’d care!” I said. “Haven’t I already told you I was a connoisseur in gardens? Why, simply look, Miss Beechinor!” I exhorted her, and threw out my hands in a large pose of admiration. “Simply regard those yew-hedges, and parterres, and grassy amphitheatres, and palisades, and statues, and cascades, and everything⁠—<em>everything</em> that goes to make a formal garden the most delectable sight in the world! Simply feast your eyes upon those orderly clipped trees and the fantastic patterns those flowers are laid out in! Why, upon my word, it looks as if all four books of Euclid had suddenly burst into blossom! And you ask me if I would <em>care</em>! Ah, it is evident <em>you</em> are not a connoisseur in gardens, Miss Beechinor!”</p>
				<p>And I had started on my way into this one, when the girl stopped me.</p>
				<p>“This must be yours,” she said. “You must have spilled it coming over the wall, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend.”</p>
				<p>It was Peter’s cigarette-case.</p>
				<p>“Why, dear me, yes!” I assented, affably. “Do you know, now, I would have been tremendously sorry to lose that? It is a sort of present⁠—an unbirthday present from a quite old friend.”</p>
				<p>She turned it over in her hand.</p>
				<p>“It’s very handsome,” she marvelled. “Such a pretty monogram! Does it stand for Poor Idiot Boy?”</p>
				<p>“Eh?” said I. “<abbr>P.I.B.</abbr>, you mean? No, that stands for Perfectly Immaculate Behaviour. My friend gave it to me because, he said, I was so good. And⁠—oh, well, he added a few things to that⁠—partial sort of a friend, you know⁠—and, really⁠—Why, really, Miss Beechinor, it would embarrass me to tell you what he added,” I protested, and modestly waved the subject aside.</p>
				<p>“Now that,” my meditations ran, “is the absolute truth. Peter did tell me I was good. And it really would embarrass me to tell her he added ‘for-nothing.’ So, this far, I have been a model of veracity.”</p>
				<p>Then I took the case⁠—gaining thereby the bliss of momentary contact with a velvet-soft trifle that seemed, somehow, to set my own grosser hand a-tingle⁠—and I cried: “Now, Miss Beechinor, you must show me the pergola. I am excessively partial to pergolas.”</p>
				<p>And in my soul, I wondered what a pergola looked like, and why on earth I had been fool enough to waste the last three days in bedeviling Peter, and how under the broad canopy of heaven I could ever have suffered from the delusion that I had seen a really adorable woman before to-day.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-24-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>But, “She is entirely too adorable,” I reasoned with myself, some three-quarters of an hour later. “In fact, I regard it as positively inconsiderate in any impecunious young person to venture to upset me in the way she has done. Why, my heart is pounding away inside me like a trip-hammer, and I am absolutely light-headed with good-will and charity and benevolent intentions toward the entire universe! Oh, Avis, Avis, you know you hadn’t any right to put me in this insane state of mind!”</p>
				<p>I was, at this moment, retracing my steps toward the spot where I had climbed the wall between Gridlington and Selwoode, but I paused now to outline a reproachful gesture in the direction from which I came.</p>
				<p>“What do you mean by having such a name?” I queried, sadly. “Avis! Why, it is the very soul of music, clear, and sweet and as insistent as a bird-call, an unforgettable lyric in four letters! It is just the sort of name a fellow cannot possibly forget. Why couldn’t you have been named Polly or Lena or Margaret, or something commonplace like that, Avis⁠—dear?”</p>
				<p>And the juxtaposition of these words appealing to my sense of euphony, I repeated it, again and again, each time with a more relishing gusto. “Avis dear! dear Avis! dear, <em>dear</em> Avis!” I experimented. “Why, each one is more hopelessly unforgettable than the other! Oh, Avis dear, why are you so absolutely and entirely unforgettable all around? Why do you ripple all your words together in that quaint fashion till it sounds like a brook discoursing? Why did you crinkle up your eyes when I told you that as yet unbotanised flower was a <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Calycanthus arithmelicus</i>? And why did you pout at me, Avis dear? A fellow finds it entirely too hard to forget things like that. And, oh, dear Avis, if you only knew what nearly happened when you pouted!”</p>
				<p>I had come to the wall by this, but again I paused to lament.</p>
				<p>“It is very inconsiderate of her, very thoughtless indeed. She might at least have asked my permission, before upsetting my plans in life. I had firmly intended to marry a rich woman, and now I am forming all sorts of preposterous notions⁠—”</p>
				<p>Then, on the bench where I had first seen her, I perceived a book. It was the iron-gray book she had been reading when I interrupted her, and I now picked it up with a sort of reverence. I regarded it as an extremely lucky book.</p>
				<p>Subsequently, “Good Lord!” said I, aloud, “what luck!”</p>
				<p>For between the pages of Justus Miles Forman’s <i epub:type="se.name.publication.book">Journey’s End</i>⁠—serving as a book-mark, according to a not infrequent shiftless feminine fashion⁠—lay a handkerchief. It was a flimsy, inadequate trifle, fringed with a tiny scallopy black border; and in one corner the letters <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. E. A. H.</abbr>, all askew, contorted themselves into any number of flourishes and irrelevant tendrils.</p>
				<p>“Now <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">M. E. A. H.</abbr> does not stand by any stretch of the imagination for Avis Beechinor. Whereas it fits Margaret Elizabeth Anstruther Hugonin uncommonly well. I wonder now⁠—?”</p>
				<p>I wondered for a rather lengthy interval.</p>
				<p>“So Byam was right, after all. And Peter was right, too. Oh, Robert Etheridge Townsend, your reputation must truly be malodorous, when at your approach timid heiresses seek shelter under an alias! ‘I have heard a deal of you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend’⁠—ah, yes, she had heard. She thought I would make love to her out of hand, I suppose, because she was wealthy⁠—”</p>
				<p>I presently flung back my head and laughed.</p>
				<p>“Eh, well! I will let no sordid considerations stand in the way of my true interests. I will marry this Margaret Hugonin even though she is rich. You have begun the comedy, my lady, and I will play it to the end. Yes, I fell honestly in love with you when I thought you were nobody in particular. So I am going to marry this Margaret Hugonin if she will have me; and if she won’t, I am going to commit suicide on her door-step, with a pathetic little note in my vest-pocket forgiving her in the most noble and wholesale manner for irrevocably blighting a future so rich in promise. Yes, that is exactly what I am going to do if she does not appreciate her wonderful good fortune. And if she’ll have me⁠—why, I wouldn’t change places with the Pope of Rome or the Czar of all the Russias! Ah, no, not I! for I prefer, upon the whole, to be immeasurably, and insanely, and unreasonably, and unadulteratedly happy. Why, but just to think of an adorable girl like that having so much money!”</p>
				<p>All in all, my meditations were incoherent but very pleasurable.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
