<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<p style="margin-top: 4em">18.</p>
			<p>
				<i>He Spends an Afternoon in Arden</i>
			</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">I had, in a general way, intended to marry Rosalind Jemmett so soon as I had completed <i>As the Coming of Dawn</i>; but in the fervour of writing that unfortunate volume, I had at first put off a little, and then a little longer, the answering of her last letter, because I was interested just then in writing well and not particularly interested in anything else; and I had finally approximated to forgetfulness of the young lady’s existence.</p>
			<p>Now, however, my thoughts harked back to her; and I found, upon<br/>
			inquiry, that Rosalind had spent all of May and a good half of April in<br/>
			Lichfield, in the same town with myself, and was now engaged to Alfred<br/>
			Chaytor⁠—an estimable person, but popularly known as “Sissy” Chaytor.<br/></p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">2</p>
			<p>And this gave an additional whet to my intentions. So I called upon the girl, and she, to my chagrin, received me with an air of having danced with me some five or six times the night before; our conversation was at first trivial and, on her part, dishearteningly cordial; and, in fine, she completely baffled me by not appearing to expect any least explanation of my discourteous neglect. This, look you, when I had been at pains to prepare a perfectly convincing one.</p>
			<p>It must be conceded I completely lost my temper; shortly afterward neither of us was speaking with excessive forethought; and each of us languidly advanced a variety of observations which were more dexterous than truthful. But I followed the intractable heiress to the Moncrieffs that spring, in spite of this rebuff, being insufferably provoked by her unshakable assumptions of my friendship and of nothing more.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">3</p>
			<p>It was perhaps a week later she told me: “This, beyond any reasonable doubt, is the Forest of Arden.”</p>
			<p>“But where Rosalind is is always Arden,” I said, politely. Yet I made a mental reservation as to a glimpse of the golf-links, which this particular nook of the forest afforded, and of a red-headed caddy in search of a lost ball.</p>
			<p>But beyond these things the sun was dying out in a riot of colour, and its level rays fell kindlily upon the gaunt pines that were thick about us two, converting them into endless aisles of vaporous gold.</p>
			<p>There was primeval peace about; an evening wind stirred lazily above, and the leaves whispered drowsily to one another over the waters of what my companion said was a “brawling loch,” though I had previously heard it reviled as a particularly treacherous and vexatious hazard. Altogether, I had little doubt that we had reached, in any event, the outskirts of Arden.</p>
			<p>“And now,” quoth she, seating herself on a fallen log, “what would you do if I were your very, very Rosalind?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t!” I cried in horror. “It wouldn’t be proper! For as a decent self-respecting heroine, you would owe it to Orlando not to listen.”</p>
			<p>“H’umph!” said Rosalind. The exclamation does not look impressive, written out; but, spoken, it placed Orlando in his proper niche.</p>
			<p>“Oh, well,” said I, and stretched myself at her feet, full length⁠—which is supposed to be a picturesque attitude⁠—“why quarrel over a name? It ought to be Gamelyn, anyhow; and, moreover, by the kindness of fate, Orlando is golfing.”</p>
			<p>Rosalind frowned, dubiously.</p>
			<p>“But golf is a very ancient game,” I reassured her. Then I bit a pine-needle in two and sighed. “Foolish fellow, when he might be⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Admiring the beauties of nature,” she suggested.</p>
			<p>Just then an impudent breeze lifted a tendril of honey-coloured hair and toyed with it, over a low, white brow⁠—and I noted that Rosalind’s hair had a curious coppery glow at the roots, a nameless colour that I have never observed anywhere else.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said I, “of nature.”</p>
			<p>“Then,” queried she, after a pause, “who are you? And what do you in this forest?”</p>
			<p>“You see,” I explained, “there were conceivably other men in Arden⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I suppose so,” she sighed, with exemplary resignation.</p>
			<p>“⁠—For you were,” I reminded her, “universally admired at your uncle’s court⁠—and equally so in the forest. And while Alfred⁠—or, strictly speaking, Gamelyn, or, if you prefer it, Orlando⁠—is the great love of your life, still⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Men are so foolish!” said Rosalind, irrelevantly.</p>
			<p>“⁠—it did not prevent you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Me!” cried she, indignant.</p>
			<p>“You had such a tender heart,” I suggested, “and suffering was abhorrent to your gentle nature.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t like cynicism, sir,” said she; “and inasmuch as tobacco is not yet discovered⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is clearly impossible that I am smoking,” I finished; “quite true.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t like cheap wit, either,” said Rosalind. “You,” she went on, with no apparent connection, “are a forester, with a good cross-bow and an unrequited attachment⁠—say, for me. You groan and hang verses and things about on the trees.”</p>
			<p>“But I don’t write verses⁠—any longer,” I amended. “Still how would this do⁠—for an oak, say⁠—</p>
			<p>“I found a lovely centre-piece<br/>
			Upon the supper-table,<br/>
			But when I looked at it again<br/>
			I saw I wasn’t able,<br/>
			And so I took my mother home<br/>
			And locked her in the stable.”<br/></p>
			<p>She considered that the plot of this epic was not sufficiently inevitable. It hadn’t, she lamented, a quite logical ending; and the plot of it, in fine, was not, somehow, convincing.</p>
			<p>“Well, in any event,” I optimistically reflected, “I am a nickel in. If your dicta had emanated from a person in Peoria or Seattle, who hadn’t bothered to read my masterpiece, they would have sounded exactly the same, and the clipping-bureau would have charged me five cents. Maybe I can’t write verses, then. But I am quite sure I can groan.” And I did so.</p>
			<p>“It sounds rather like a fog-horn,” said Rosalind, still in the critic’s vein; “but I suppose it is the proper thing. Now,” she continued, and quite visibly brightening, “you can pretend to have an unrequited attachment for me.”</p>
			<p>“But I can’t⁠—” I decisively said.</p>
			<p>“Can’t,” she echoed. It has not been mentioned previously that Rosalind was pretty. She was especially so just now, in pouting. And, therefore, “⁠—pretend,” I added.</p>
			<p>She preserved a discreet silence.</p>
			<p>“Nor,” I continued, with firmness, “am I a shambling, nameless, unshaven denizen of Arden, who hasn’t anything to do except to carry a spear and fall over it occasionally. I will no longer conceal the secret of my identity. I am Jaques.”</p>
			<p>“You can’t be Jaques,” she dissented; “you are too stout.”</p>
			<p>“I am well-built,” I admitted, modestly; “as in an elder case, sighing and grief have blown me up like a bladder; yet proper pride, if nothing else, demands that my name should appear on the programme.”</p>
			<p>“But would Jaques be the sort of person who’d⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“Who wouldn’t be?” I asked, with appropriate ardour. “No, depend upon it, Jaques was not any more impervious to temptation than the rest of us; and, indeed, in the French version, as you will find, he eventually married Celia.”</p>
			<p>“Minx!” said she; and it seemed to me quite possible that she referred to Celia Reindan, and my heart glowed.</p>
			<p>“And how,” queried Rosalind, presently, “came you to the Forest of<br/>
			Arden, good Jaques?”<br/></p>
			<p>I groaned once more. “It was a girl,” I darkly said.</p>
			<p>“Of course,” assented Rosalind, beaming as to the eyes. Then she went on, and more sympathetically: “Now, Jaques, you can tell me the whole story.”</p>
			<p>“Is it necessary?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“Surely,” said she, with sudden interest in the structure of pine-cones; “since for a long while I have wanted to know all about Jaques. You see Mr. Shakespeare is a bit hazy about him.”</p>
			<p>“<i>So</i>!” I thought, triumphantly.</p>
			<p>And aloud, “It is an old story,” I warned her, “perhaps the oldest of all old stories. It is the story of a man and a girl. It began with a chance meeting and developed into a packet of old letters, which is the usual ending of this story.”</p>
			<p>Rosalind’s brows protested.</p>
			<p>“Sometimes,” I conceded, “it culminates in matrimony; but the ending is not necessarily tragic.”</p>
			<p>I dodged exactly in time; and the pine-cone splashed into the hazard.</p>
			<p>“It happened,” I continued, “that, on account of the man’s health, they were separated for a whole year’s time before⁠—before things had progressed to any extent. When they did progress, it was largely by letters. That is why this story ended in such a large package.</p>
			<p>“Letters,” Rosalind confided, to one of the pines, “are so unsatisfactory. They mean so little.”</p>
			<p>“To the man,” I said, firmly, “they meant a great deal. They brought him everything that he most wished for⁠—comprehension, sympathy, and, at last, comfort and strength when they were sore needed. So the man, who was at first but half in earnest, announced to himself that he had made a discovery. ‘I have found,’ said he, ‘the great white love which poets have dreamed of. I love this woman greatly, and she, I think, loves me. God has made us for each other, and by the aid of her love I will be pure and clean and worthy even of her.’ You have doubtless discovered by this stage in my narrative,” I added, as in parenthesis, “that the man was a fool.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t!” said Rosalind.</p>
			<p>“Oh, he discovered it himself in due time⁠—but not until after he had written a book about her. <i>As the Coming of Dawn</i> the title was to have been. It was⁠—oh, just about her. It tried to tell how greatly he loved her. It tried⁠—well, it failed of course, because it isn’t within the power of any writer to express what the man felt for that girl. Why, his love was so great⁠—to him, poor fool!⁠—that it made him at times forget the girl herself, apparently. He didn’t want to write her trivial letters. He just wanted to write that great book in her honour, which would <i>make</i> her understand, even against her will, and then to die, if need be, as Geoffrey Rudel did. For that was the one thing which counted⁠—to make her understand⁠—” I paused, and anyone could see that I was greatly moved. In fact, I was believing every word of it by this time.</p>
			<p>“Oh, but who wants a man to <i>die</i> for her?” wailed Rosalind.</p>
			<p>“It is quite true that one infinitely prefers to see him make a fool of himself. So the man discovered when he came again to bring his foolish book to her⁠—the book that was to make her understand. And so he burned it⁠—in a certain June. For the girl had merely liked him, and had been amused by him. So she had added him to her collection of men⁠—quite a large one, by the way⁠—and was, I believe, a little proud of him. It was, she said, rather a rare variety, and much prized by collectors.”</p>
			<p>“And how was <i>she</i> to know?” said Rosalind; and then, remorsefully:<br/>
			“Was it a very horrid girl?”<br/></p>
			<p>“It was not exactly repulsive,” said I, as dreamily, and looking up into the sky.</p>
			<p>There was a pause. Then someone in the distance⁠—a forester, probably⁠—called “Fore!” and Rosalind awoke from her reverie.</p>
			<p>“Then⁠—?” said she.</p>
			<p>“Then came the customary Orlando⁠—oh, well! Alfred, if you like. The name isn’t altogether inappropriate, for he does encounter existence with much the same abandon which I have previously noticed in a muffin. For the rest, he was a nicely washed fellow, with a sufficiency of the mediaeval equivalents for bonds and rubber-tired buggies and country places. Oh, yes! I forgot to say that the man was poor⁠—also that the girl had a great deal of common-sense and no less than three longheaded aunts. And so the girl talked to the man in a common-sense fashion⁠—and after that she was never at home.”</p>
			<p>“Never?” said Rosalind.</p>
			<p>“Only that time they talked about the weather,” said I. “So the man fell out of bed just about then, and woke up and came to his sober senses.”</p>
			<p>“He did it very easily,” said Rosalind, almost as if in resentment.</p>
			<p>“The novelty of the process attracted him,” I pleaded. “So he said⁠—in a perfectly sensible way⁠—that he had known all along it was only a game they were playing⁠—a game in which there were no stakes. That was a lie. He had put his whole soul into the game, playing as he knew for his life’s happiness; and the verses, had they been worthy of the love which caused them to be written, would have been among the great songs of the world. But while the man knew at last that he had been a fool, he was swayed by a man-like reluctance against admitting it. So he laughed⁠—and lied⁠—and broke away, hurt, but still laughing.”</p>
			<p>“You hadn’t mentioned any verses before,” said Rosalind.</p>
			<p>“I told you he was a fool,” said I. “And, after all, that is the entire story.”</p>
			<p>Then I spent several minutes in wondering what would happen next. During this time I lost none of my interest in the sky. I believed everything I had said: my emotions would have done credit to a Romeo or an Amadis.</p>
			<p>“The first time that the girl was not at home,” Rosalind observed, impersonally, “the man had on a tan coat and a brown derby. He put on his gloves as he walked down the street. His shoulders were the most indignant⁠—and hurt things she had ever seen. Then the girl wrote to him⁠—a strangely sincere letter⁠—and tore it up.”</p>
			<p>“Historical research,” I murmured, “surely affords no warrant for such attire among the rural denizens of tranquil Arden.”</p>
			<p>“You see,” continued Rosalind, oblivious to interruption, “I know all about the girl⁠—which is more than you do.”</p>
			<p>“That,” I conceded, “is disastrously probable.”</p>
			<p>“When she realised that she was to see the man again⁠—<i>Did</i> you ever feel as if something had lifted you suddenly hundreds of feet above rainy days and cold mutton for luncheon, and the possibility of other girls’ wearing black evening dresses, when you wanted yours to be the only one in the room? Well, that is the way she felt at first, when she read his note. At first, she realised nothing beyond the fact that he was nearing her, and that she would presently see him. She didn’t even plan what she would wear, or what she would say to him. In an indefinite way, she was happier than she had ever been before⁠—or has been since⁠—until the doubts and fears and knowledge that give children and fools a wide berth came to her⁠—and <i>then</i> she saw it all against her will, and thought it all out, and came to a conclusion.”</p>
			<p>I sat up. There was really nothing of interest occurring overhead.</p>
			<p>“They had played at loving⁠—lightly, it is true, but they had gone so far in their letter writing that they could not go backward⁠—only forward, or not at all. She had known all along that the man was but half in earnest⁠—believe me, a girl always knows that, even though she may not admit it to herself⁠—and she had known that a love affair meant to him material for a sonnet or so, and a well-turned letter or two, and nothing more. For he was the kind of man that never quite grows up. He was coming to her, pleased, interested, and a little eager⁠—in love with the idea of loving her⁠—willing to meet her half-way, and very willing to follow her the rest of the way⁠—if she could draw him. And what was she to do? Could she accept his gracefully insulting semblance of a love she knew he did not feel? Could they see each other a dozen times, swearing not to mention the possibility of loving⁠—so that she might have a chance to reimpress him with her blondined hair⁠—it <i>is</i> touched up, you know⁠—and small talk? And⁠—and <i>besides</i>⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is the duty of every young woman to consider what she owes to her family,” said I, absentmindedly. Rosalind Jemmett’s family consists of three aunts, and the chief of these is Aunt Marcia, who lives in Lichfield. Aunt Marcia is a portly, acidulous and discomposing person, with eyes like shoe-buttons and a Savonarolan nose. She is also a well-advertised philanthropist, speaks neatly from the platform, and has wide experience as a patroness, and extreme views as to ineligibles.</p>
			<p>Rosalind flushed somewhat. “And so,” said she, “the girl exercised her common-sense, and was nervous, and said foolish things about new plays, and the probability of rain⁠—to keep from saying still more foolish things about herself; and refused to talk personalities; and let him go, with the knowledge that he would not come back. Then she went to her room, and had a good cry. Now,” she added, after a pause, “you understand.”</p>
			<p>“I do not,” I said, very firmly, “understand a lot of things.”</p>
			<p>“Yet a woman would,” she murmured.</p>
			<p>This being a statement I was not prepared to contest, I waved it aside. “And so,” said I, “they laughed; and agreed it was a boy-and-girl affair; and were friends.”</p>
			<p>“It was the best thing⁠—” said she.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I assented⁠—“for Orlando.”</p>
			<p>“⁠—and it was the most sensible thing.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, eminently!”</p>
			<p>This seemed to exhaust the subject, and I lay down once more among the pine-needles.</p>
			<p>“And that,” said Rosalind, “was the reason Jaques came to Arden?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said I.</p>
			<p>“And found it⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“Shall we say⁠—Hades?”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” she murmured, scandalised.</p>
			<p>“It happened,” I continued, “that he was cursed with a good memory. And the zest was gone from his little successes and failures, now there was no one to share them; and nothing seemed to matter very much. Oh, he really was the sort of man that never grows up! And it was dreary to live among memories of the past, and his life was now somewhat perturbed by disapproval of his own folly and by hunger for a woman who was out of his reach.”</p>
			<p>“And Rosalind⁠—I mean the girl⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“She married Orlando⁠—or Gamelyn, or Alfred, or Athelstane, or Ethelred, or somebody⁠—and, whoever it was, they lived happily ever afterward,” I said, morosely.</p>
			<p>Rosalind pondered over this dénouement for a moment.</p>
			<p>“Do you know,” said she, “I think⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It’s a rather dangerous practice,” I warned her.</p>
			<p>Rosalind sighed, wearily; but in her cheek at about this time occurred a dimple.</p>
			<p>“⁠—I think that Rosalind must have thought the play very badly named.”</p>
			<p>“<i>As You Like It</i>?” I queried, obtusely.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—since it wasn’t, for her.”</p>
			<p>It is unwholesome to lie on the ground after sunset.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">4</p>
			<p>“I had rather a scene with Alfred yesterday morning. He said you drank, and gambled, and were always running after⁠—people, and weren’t in fine, a desirable person for me to know. He insinuated, in fact, that you were a villain of the very deepest and non-crocking dye. He told me of instances. His performance would have done credit to Ananias. I was <i>mad</i>! So I gave him his old ring back, and told him things I can’t tell <i>you</i>⁠—no, not just yet, dear. He is rather like a muffin, isn’t he?” she said, with the lightest possible little laugh⁠—“particularly like one that isn’t quite done.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Rosalind,” I babbled, “I mean to prove that you were right. And I <i>will</i> prove it, too!”</p>
			<p>And indeed I meant all that I said⁠—just then.</p>
			<p>Rosalind said: “Oh, Jaques, Jaques! what a child you are!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
