<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<p style="margin-top: 4em">4.</p>
			<p>
				<i>He Talks with Charteris</i>
			</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">It was upon the evening of this day, after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blagden had been duly rice-pelted and entrained, that I first talked against John Charteris. The novelist was, as has been said, a cousin of Peter Blagden, and as such, was one of the wedding guests at Bellemeade; and that evening, well toward midnight, the little man, midway in the consumption of one of his interminable cigarettes, happened to come upon me seated upon the terrace and gazing, rather vacantly, in the direction of the moon.</p>
			<p>I was not thinking of anything in particular; only there was a by-end of verse which sang itself over and over again, somewhere in the back of my brain⁠—“Her eyes were the eyes of a bride whom delight makes afraid, her eyes were the eyes of a bride”⁠—and so on, all over again, as at night a traveller may hear his train jogging through a monotonous and stiff-jointed song; and in my heart there was just hunger.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">2</p>
			<p>Charteris had heard, one may presume, of my disastrous love-business; and with all an author’s relish of emotion, in others, chose his gambit swiftly. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, is it not? Then may a murrain light upon thee, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend⁠—whatever a murrain may happen to be⁠—since you have disturbed me in the concoction of an ever-living and entrancing fable.”</p>
			<p>“I may safely go as far,” said I, “as to offer the proverbial penny.”</p>
			<p>“Done!” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris. He meditated for a moment, and then began, in a low and curiously melodious voice, to narrate</p>
			<p>
				<i>The Apologue of the First Conjugation</i>
			</p>
			<p>“When the gods of Hellas were discrowned, there was a famous scurrying from Olympos to the world of mortals, where each deity must henceforward make shift to do without godhead:⁠—Aphrodite in her hollow hill, where the good knight Tannhauser revels yet, it may be; Hephaestos, in some smithy; whilst Athene, for aught I know, established a girls’ boarding school, and Helios, as is notorious, died under priestly torture, and Dionysos cannily took holy orders, and Hermes set up as a merchant in Friesland. But Eros went to the Grammarians. He would be a schoolmaster.</p>
			<p>“The Grammarians, grim, snuffy and wrinkled though they might be, were no more impervious to his allures than are the rest of us, and in consequence appointed him to an office. This office was, I glean of mediaeval legend, that of teaching dunderheaded mortals the First Conjugation. So Eros donned cap and gown, took lodgings with a quiet musical family, and set <i>amo</i> as the first model verb; and ever since this period has the verb ‘to love’ been the first to be mastered in all well-constituted grammars, as it is in life.</p>
			<p>“Heigho! it is not an easy verb to conjugate. One gets into trouble enough, in floundering through its manifold nuances, which range inevitably through the bold-faced ‘I love,’ the confident ‘I will love,’ the hopeful ‘I may be loved,’ and so on to the wistful, pitiful Pluperfect Subjunctive Passive, ‘I might have been loved if’⁠—Then each of us may supply the Protasis as best befits his personal opinion and particular scars, and may tear his hair, or scribble verses, or adopt the cynical, or, in fine, assume any pose which strikes his fancy. For he has graduated into the Second Conjugation, which is <i>moneo</i>; and may now admonish to his heart’s content, whilst looking back complacently into the First Classroom, where others⁠—and so many others!⁠—are still struggling with that mischancy verb, and are involved in the very conditions⁠—verbal or otherwise⁠—which aforetime saddened him, or showed him a possible byway toward recreation, or played the deuce with his liver, according to the nature of the man.</p>
			<p>“Eros is a hard, implacable pedagogue, and for the fact his scholars suffer. He wields a rod rather than a filigree bow, as old romancers fabled⁠—no plaything, but a most business-like article, well-poised in the handle, and thence tapering into graceful, stinging nothingness; and not a scholar escapes at least a flick of it.</p>
			<p>“I can fancy the class called up as Eros administers, with zest, his penalties. Master Paris! for loving his neighbor a little less than himself, and his neighbor’s wife a little more. Master Lancelot! ditto. Masters Petrarch, Tristram, Antony, Juan Tenorio, Dante Alighieri, and others! ditto. There are a great many called up for this particular form of peccancy, you observe; even Master David has to lay aside his Psalm Book, and go forward with the others for chastisement. Master Romeo! for trespassing in other people’s gardens and mausoleums. Master Leander! for swimming in the Hellespont after dark; and Master Tarquin! for mistaking his bedroom at the Collatini’s house-party.</p>
			<p>“Thus, one by one, each scholar goes into the darkened private office. The master handles his rod⁠—eia! ’tis borrowed from the Erinnyes⁠—lovingly, caressingly, like a very conscientious person about the performance of his duty. Then comes the dreadful order, ‘Take down your breeches, sir!.’⁠ ⁠… But the scene is too horrible to contemplate. He punishes all, this schoolmaster, for he is unbelievably old, and with the years’ advance has grown querulous.</p>
			<p>“Well, now I approach my moral, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend. One must have one’s birching with the others, and of necessity there remains but to make the best of it. Birching is not a dignified process, and the endurer comes therefrom both sore and shamefaced. Yet always in such contretemps it is expedient to brazen out the matter, and to present as stately an appearance, we will say, as one’s welts permit.</p>
			<p>“First, to the world⁠—”</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">3</p>
			<p>But at this point I raised my hand. “That is easily done, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris, inasmuch as the world cares nothing whatever about it. The world is composed of men and women who have their own affairs to mind. How in heaven’s name does it concern them that a boy has dreamed dreams and has gone mad like a star-struck moth? It was foolish of him. Such is the verdict, given in a voice that is neither kindly nor severe; and the world, mildly wondering, passes on to deal with more weighty matters. For vegetables are higher than ever this year, and, upon my word, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Grundy, ma’am, a housekeeper simply doesn’t know where to turn, with the outrageous prices they are asking for everything these days. No, believe me, the world does not take love-affairs very seriously⁠—not even the great ones,” I added, in noble toleration.</p>
			<p>And with an appreciative chuckle, Charteris sank beside me upon the bench.</p>
			<p>“My adorable boy! so you have a tongue in your head.”</p>
			<p>“But can’t you imagine the knights talking over Lancelot’s affair with Guenevere, at whatever was the Arthurian substitute for a club? and sniggering over it? and Lamoracke sagaciously observing that there was always a crooked streak in the Leodograunce family? Or one Roman matron punching a chicken in the ribs, and remarking to her neighbor at the poultry man’s stall: ‘Well, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gracchus, they do say Antony is absolutely daft over that notorious Queen of Egypt. A brazen-faced thing, with a very muddy complexion, I’m told, and practically no reputation, of course, after the way she carried on with Caesar. And that reminds me, I hear your little Caius suffers from the croup. Now <i>my</i> remedy’⁠—and so they waddle on, to price asparagus.”</p>
			<p>Charteris said: “Well! we need not go out of our way to meddle with the affairs of others; the entanglement is most disastrously apt to come about of itself quite soon enough. Yet a little while and Lancelot will be running Lamoracke through the body, while the King storms Joyeuse Garde; a few months and your Roman matron will weep quietly on her unshared pillow⁠—not aloud, though, for fear of disturbing the children⁠—while Gracchus is dreadfully seasick at Actium.”</p>
			<p>“But that doesn’t prove anything,” I stammered. “Why, it doesn’t follow logically⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Nor does anything else. This fact is the chief charm of life. You will presently find, I think, that living means a daily squandering of interest upon the first half of a number of two-part stories which have not ever any sequel. Oh, my adorable boy, I envy you to-night’s misery so profoundly I am half unwilling to assure you that in the ultimate one finds a broken heart rather fattening than otherwise; and that a blighted life has never yet been known to prevent queer happenings in conservatories and such-like secluded places or to rob a solitude <i>a deux</i> of possibilities. I grant you that love is a wonderful thing; but there are a many emotions which stand toward love much as the makers of certain marmalades assert their wares to stand toward butter⁠—‘serving as an excellent occasional substitute.’ At least, so you will find it. And unheroic as it is, within the month you will forget.”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—I shall not quite forget,” said I.</p>
			<p>“Then were you the more unwise. To forget, both speedily and frequently, is the sole method of rendering life livable. One is here; the importance of the fact in the eternal scheme of things is perhaps a shade more trivial than one is disposed to concede, but in any event, one is here; and here, for a very little while in youth, one is capable of happiness. For it is a colorful world, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, containing much, upon the whole, to captivate both eye and taste; a world manured and fertilized by the no longer lovely bodies of persons who died in youth. Oh, their coffins lie everywhere beneath our feet, thick as raisins in a pudding, whithersoever we tread. Yet every one of these poor relics was once a boy or a girl, and wore a body that was capable of so much pleasure! To-day, unused to gain the fullness of that pleasure, and now not ever to be used, they lie beneath us, in their coffins, these white, straight bodies, like swords untried that rust in the scabbard. Meanwhile, on every side is apparent the not yet out-wasted instrument, and one is naturally inquisitive⁠—so that one’s fingers and one’s nostrils twitch at times, even in the hour when one is most miserable, very much as yours do now.”</p>
			<p>For a long while I meditated. Then I said: “I am not really miserable, because, all in all, one is content to pay the price of happiness. I have been very happy sometimes during the past year; and whatever the blind Fate that mismanages the world may elect to demand in payment, I shall not haggle. No, by heavens! I would have nothing changed, and least of all would I forget; having drunk nectar neat, one would not qualify it with the water of Lethe.”</p>
			<p>I rose, not unhandsome, I trusted, in the moonlight. I was hoping <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris would notice my new dress-suit, procured in honor of Stella’s wedding. And I said: “The play is over, the little comedy is played out. She must go; at least she has tarried for a little. She does not love you; ah! but she did. God speed her, then, the woman we have all loved and lost, and still dream of on sleepy Sundays; and all possible happiness to her! One must be grateful that through her one has known the glory of loving. Even though she never cared⁠—‘and never could understand’⁠—one may not but be glad that one has known and loved in youth the Only Woman.”</p>
			<p>“The Only Woman has a way of leaving many heirs, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, that play the deuce with the estate.”</p>
			<p>“⁠—So to-morrow, like the person in <i>Lycidas</i>, I am for fresh fields, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris. And indeed it is high time that I were journeying, since she and I have rested, and have laughed and eaten and drunk our fill at this particular tavern; and now it is closing time. A plague on these foolish and impertinent laws, say I quite heartily; for it is cold and cheerless outside, whereas here within I was perfectly comfortable. None the less I must go, or else be evicted by the constable; so good-night, my sweet; and as for you, Madam Clotho, pray what unconscionable score have you chalked up against me?”</p>
			<p>I grimaced. “Heavens! what an infinity of sighs, sonnets, lamentations, and heart-burnings is this that I owe to Fate and Decency!”</p>
			<p>Charteris applauded as though it were a comedy. “In effect, Marian’s married and you stand here, alive and merry at⁠—pray what precise period of life, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend?”</p>
			<p>“I confess to twenty-one at present, sir, though I trust to live it down in time.”</p>
			<p>“I would hardly have thought you that venerable. Well, I predict for you a life without achievements but of gusto. Yes, you will bring a seasoned palate to your grave⁠—and I envy you. We open Willoughby Hall next week, and of course you will make one of the party. For you write, I know; and you will want to talk to me about editors and read me all your damnable verses. Nothing could please me more. Good-night, you glorious boy.”</p>
			<p>And the little man wheeled and departed, leaving me to reflect, with appropriate emotions, that I had been formally invited to visit the founder of the Economist school of writers.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">4</p>
			<p>“He said it,” I more lately observed⁠—“yes, he undoubtedly said it. And he wrote <i>Ashtaroth’s Lackey</i> and <i>In Old Lichfield</i> and <i>The Foolish Prince</i>, and he knows all the magazine editors personally, and they are probably only too glad to oblige him about anything, and⁠—Oh, may be, it is only a dream, after all.” My heart was pounding, but not with sorrow or despair or any other maudlin passion; and Stella was now as remote from my thoughts as was Joan of Arc or Pharaoh’s daughter.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
