<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<p style="margin-top: 4em">16.</p>
			<p>
				<i>He Seeks for Copy</i>
			</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">I had aforetime ordered Mr. George Bulmer to read <i>The Apostates</i>, and, as the author of this volume explained, from motives that were purely well-meaning. To-night I was superintending the process.</p>
			<p>“For the scene of the book is the Green Chalybeate,” said I; “and it may be my masterly rhetoric will so far awaken your benighted soul, Uncle George, as to enable you to perceive what the more immediate scenery is really like. Why, think of it! what if you should presently fall so deeply in love with the adjacent mountains as to consent to overlook the deficiencies of the more adjacent café! Try now, nunky! try hard to think that the right verb is really more important than the right vermouth! and you have no idea what good it may do you.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Bulmer read on, with a bewildered face, while I gently stirred the contents of my tall and delectably odored glass. It was “frosted” to a nicety. We were drinking “Mamie Taylors” that summer, you may remember; and I had just brought up a pitcherful from the bar.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I say, you know!” observed Uncle George, as he finished the sixth chapter, and flung down the book.</p>
			<p>“Rot, utter rot,” I assented pleasantly; “puerile and futile trifling with fragments of the seventh commandment, as your sturdy common-sense instantly detected. In fact,” I added, hopefully, “I think that chapter is trivial enough to send the book into a tenth edition. In <i>Afield</i>, you know, I tried a different tack. Actuated by the noblest sentiments, the heroine mixes prussic acid with her father’s whiskey and water; and ‘Old-Fashioned’ and ‘Fair Play’ have been obliging enough to write to the newspapers about this harrowing instance of the deplorably low moral standards of to-day. Uncle George, do you think that a real lady is ever justified in obliterating a paternal relative? You ought to meditate upon that problem, for it is really a public question nowadays. Oh, and there was a quite lovely clipping last week I forgot to show you⁠—all about Electra, as contrasted with Jonas Chuzzlewit, and my fine impersonal attitude, and the survival of the fittest, and so on.”</p>
			<p>But Uncle George refused to be comforted. “Look here, Bob!” said he, pathetically, “why don’t you brace up and write something⁠—well! we’ll put it, something of the sort you <i>can</i> do. For you can, you know.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, but is not a judicious nastiness the market-price of a second edition before publication?” I softly queried. “I had no money. I was ashamed to beg, and I was too well brought up to steal anything adroitly enough not to be caught. And so, in view of my own uncle’s deafness to the prayers of an impecunious orphan, I have descended to this that I might furnish butter for my daily bread.” I refilled my glass and held the sparkling drink for a moment against the light. “This time next year,” said I, as dreamily, “I shall be able to afford cake; for I shall have written <i>As the Coming of Dawn</i>.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Bulmer sniffed, and likewise refilled his glass. “You catch me lending you any money for your⁠—brief Biblical words!” he said.</p>
			<p>“For the reign of subtle immorality,” I sighed, “is well-nigh over. Already the augurs of the pen begin to wink as they fable of a race of men who are evilly scintillant in talk and gracefully erotic. We know that this, alas, cannot be, and that in real life our peccadilloes dwindle into dreary vistas of divorce cases and the police-court, and that crime has lost its splendour. We sin very carelessly⁠—sordidly, at times⁠—and artistic wickedness is rare. It is a pity; life was once a scarlet volume scattered with misty-coated demons; it is now a yellow journal, wherein our vices are the hackneyed formulas of journalists, and our virtues are the not infrequent misprints. Yes, it is a pity!”</p>
			<p>“Dearest Robert!” remonstrated Mr. Bulmer, “you are sadly <i>passé</i>: that pose is of the Beardsley period and went out many magazines ago.”</p>
			<p>“The point is well taken,” I admitted, “for our life of to-day is already reflected⁠—faintly, I grant you⁠—in the best-selling books. We have passed through the period of a slavish admiration for wickedness and wide margins; our quondam decadents now snigger in a parody of primeval innocence, and many things are forgiven the latter-day poet if his botany be irreproachable. Indeed, it is quite time; for we have tossed over the contents of every closet in the <i>menage à trois</i>. And I⁠—<i>moi, qui vous parle</i>⁠—I am wearied of hansom-cabs and the flaring lights of great cities, even as so alluringly depicted in <i>Afield</i>; and henceforth I shall demonstrate the beauty of pastoral innocence.”</p>
			<p>“Saul among the prophets,” Uncle George suggested, helpfully.</p>
			<p>“Quite so,” I assented, “and my first prophecy will be <i>As the Coming of Dawn</i>.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Bulmer tapped his forehead significantly. “Mad, quite mad!” said he, in parenthesis.</p>
			<p>“I shall be idyllic,” I continued, sweetly; “I shall write of the ineffable glory of first love. I shall babble of green fields and the keen odours of spring and the shamefaced countenances of lovers, met after last night’s kissing. It will be the story of love that stirs blindly in the hearts of maids and youths, and does not know that it is love⁠—the love which manhood has half forgotten and that youth has not the skill to write of. But I, at twenty-four, shall write its story as it has never been written; and I shall make a great book of it, that will go into thousands and thousands of editions. Yes, before heaven, I will!”</p>
			<p>I brought my fist down, emphatically, on the table.</p>
			<p>“H’m!” said Mr. Bulmer, dubiously; “going back to renew associations with your first love? I have tried it, and I generally find her grandchildren terribly in the way.”</p>
			<p>“It is imperative,” said I⁠—“yes, imperative for the scope of my book, that I should view life through youthful and unsophisticated eyes. I discovered that, upon the whole, Miss Jemmett is too obviously an urban product to serve my purpose. And I can’t find any one who will.”</p>
			<p>Uncle George whistled softly. “ ‘Honourable young gentleman,’ ” he murmured, as to himself, “ ‘desires to meet attractive and innocent young lady. Object: to learn how to be idyllic in three-hundred pages.’ ”</p>
			<p>There was no commentary upon his text.</p>
			<p>“I say,” queried Mr. Bulmer, “do you think this sort of thing is fair to the girl? Isn’t it a little cold-blooded?”</p>
			<p>“Respected nunky, you are at times very terribly the man in the street!<br/>
			Anyhow, I leave the Green Chalybeate to-morrow in search of <i>As the<br/>
			Coming of Dawn</i>.”<br/></p>
			<p>“Look here,” said Mr. Bulmer, rising, “if you start on a tour of the country, looking for assorted dawns and idylls, it will end in my abducting you from some rustic institution for the insane. You take a liver-pill and go to bed! I don’t promise anything, mind, but perhaps about the first I can manage a little cheque if only you will make oath on a few Bibles not to tank up on it in Lichfield. The transoms there,” he added unkindlily, “are not built for those full rich figures.”</p>
			<p>Next morning, I notified the desk-clerk, and, quite casually, both the newspaper correspondents, that the Green Chalybeate was about to be bereft of the presence of a distinguished novelist. Then, as my train did not leave till night, I resolved to be bored on horseback, rather than on the golf-links, and had Guendolen summoned, from the stable, for a final investigation of the country roads thereabouts.</p>
			<p>Guendolen this afternoon elected to follow a new route; and knowing by experience that any questioning of this decision could but result in undignified defeat, I assented. Thus it came about that we circled parallel to the boardwalk, which leads uphill to the deserted Royal Hotel, and passed its rows of broken windows; and went downhill again, always at Guendolen’s election; and thus came to the creek, which babbled across the roadway and was overhung with thick foliage that lisped and whispered cheerfully in the placid light of the declining sun. It was there that the germ of <i>As the Coming of Dawn</i> was found.</p>
			<p>For I had fallen into a reverie over the deplorable obstinacy of my new heroine, who declined, for all my labours, to be unsophisticated; and taking advantage of this, Guendolen had twitched the reins from my hand and proceeded to satisfy her thirst in a manner that was rather too noisy to be quite good form. I sat in patience, idly observing the sparkling reflection of the sunlight on the water. I was elaborating a comparison between my obstinate heroine and Guendolen. Then Guendolen snorted, as something rustled through the underbrush, and turning, I perceived a Vision.</p>
			<p>The Vision was in white, with a profusion of open-work. There were blue ribbons connected with it. There were also black eyes, of the almond-shaped, heavy-lidded variety that I had thought existed only in Lely’s pictures, and great coils of brown hair which was gold where the chequered sunlight fell upon it, and two lips that were inexpressibly red. I was filled with pity for my tired horse, and a resolve that for this once her thirst should be quenched.</p>
			<p>Thereupon, I lifted my cap hastily; and Guendolen scrambled to the other bank, and spluttered, and had carried me well past the Iron Spring, before I announced to the evening air that I was a fool, and that Guendolen was describable by various quite picturesque and derogatory epithets. And I smiled.</p>
			<p>“Now, Robert Etheridge Townsend, you writer of books, here is a subject made to your hand!” And then:</p>
			<p>“Only ’twixt the light and shade<br/>
			Floating memories of my maid<br/>
			Make me pray for Guendolen.”<br/></p>
			<p>After this we retraced our steps. I was peering anxiously about the roadway.</p>
			<p>“Pardon me,” said I, subsequently; “but <i>have</i> you seen anything of a watch⁠—a small gold one, set with pearls?”</p>
			<p>“Heavens!” said the Vision, sympathetically, “what a pity! Are you sure it fell here?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t seem to have it about me,” I answered, with cryptic, but entire veracity. I searched about my pockets, with a puckered brow. “And as we stopped here⁠—”</p>
			<p>I looked inquiringly into the water.</p>
			<p>“From this side,” observed the Vision, impersonally, “there is less glare from the brook.”</p>
			<p>Having tied Guendolen to a swinging limb, I sat down contentedly in these woods. The Vision moved a little, lest I be crowded.</p>
			<p>“It might be further up the road,” she suggested.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I must have left it at the hotel,” I observed.</p>
			<p>“You might look⁠—” said she, peering into the water.</p>
			<p>“Forever!” I assented.</p>
			<p>The Vision flushed, “I didn’t mean⁠—” she began.</p>
			<p>“But I did,” quoth I⁠—“and every word of it.”</p>
			<p>“Why, in that case,” said she, and rose to her feet, “I’d better⁠—” A frown wrinkled her brow; then a deep, curved dimple performed a similar office for her cheek. “I wonder⁠—” said she.</p>
			<p>“Why, you would be a bold-faced jig,” said I, composedly; “but, after all there is nobody about. And, besides⁠—for I suspect you of being one of the three dilapidated persons in veils who came last night⁠—we are going to be introduced right after supper, anyway.”</p>
			<p>The Vision sat down. “You mentioned your sanatorium?” quoth she.</p>
			<p>“The Asylum of Love,” said I; “discharged⁠—under a false impression⁠—as cured, and sent to paradise.</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said I, defiant, “but it <i>is</i>!”</p>
			<p>She looked about her. “The woods <i>are</i> rather beautiful,” she conceded, softly.</p>
			<p>“They form a quite appropriate background,” said I. “It is a veritable<br/>
			Eden, before the coming of the snake.”<br/></p>
			<p>“Before?” she queried, dubiously.</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly,” said I, and felt my ribs, in meditative wise. “Ah, but I thought I missed something! We participate in a historic moment. This is in Eden immediately after the creation of⁠—Well, but of course you are acquainted with that famous bull about Eve’s being the fairest of her daughters?”</p>
			<p>“It is <i>quite</i> time,” said she, judicially, “for me to go back to the hotel, before⁠—since we are speaking of animals⁠—your presence here is noticed by one of the squirrels.”</p>
			<p>“It is not good,” I pleaded, “for man to be alone.”</p>
			<p>“I have heard,” said she, “that⁠—almost any one can cite scripture to his purpose.”</p>
			<p>I thrust out a foot for inspection. “No suggestion of a hoof,” said I; “and not the slightest odour of brimstone, as you will kindly note; and my inoffensive name is Robert Townsend.”</p>
			<p>“Of course,” she submitted, “I could never think of making your acquaintance in this irregular fashion; and, therefore, of course, I could not think of telling you that my name is Marian Winwood.”</p>
			<p>“Of course not,” I agreed; “it would be highly improper.”</p>
			<p>“⁠—And it is more than time for me to go to supper,” she concluded again, with a lacuna, as it seemed to me, in the deduction.</p>
			<p>“Look here!” I remonstrated; “it isn’t anywhere near six yet.” I exhibited my watch to support this statement.</p>
			<p>“Oh!” she observed, with wide, indignant eyes.</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I mean⁠—” I stammered.</p>
			<p>She rose to her feet.</p>
			<p>“⁠—I will explain how I happened to be carrying two watches⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I do not care to listen to any explanations. Why should I?”</p>
			<p>“⁠—upon,” I firmly said, “the third piazza of the hotel. And this very evening.”</p>
			<p>“You will not.” And this was said even more firmly. “And I hope you will have the kindness to keep away from these woods; for I shall probably always walk here in the afternoon.” Then, with an indignant toss of the head, the Vision disappeared.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">3</p>
			<p>I whistled. Subsequently I galloped back to the hotel.</p>
			<p>“See here!” said I, to the desk-clerk; “how long does this place keep open?”</p>
			<p>“Season closes latter part of September, sir.”</p>
			<p>I told him I would need my rooms till then.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
