<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<p id="id01702" style="margin-top: 4em">27.</p>
			<p id="id01703">
				<i>He Calls, and Counsels, and Considers</i>
			</p>
			<p id="id01704" style="margin-top: 2em">“I am now” said I, in my soul, “quite immeasurably, and insanely, and unreasonably, and unadulteratedly happy. Why, of course I am.”</p>
			<p id="id01705">This statement was advanced just two weeks later than the events previously recorded. And the origin of it was the fact that I was now engaged to Avis Beechinor though it was not as yet to be “announced”; just this concession alone had Mrs. Beechinor wrested from an indignant and, latterly, a tearful interview.⁠ ⁠… For I had called at Selwoode, in due form; and after leaving Mrs. Beechinor had been pounced upon by an excited and comely little person in black.</p>
			<p id="id01706">“Don’t you mind a word she said,” this lady had exhorted, “because she is <i>the</i> Gadarene swine, and Avis has told me everything! Of course you are to be married at once, and I only wish <i>I</i> could find the only man in the world who can keep me interested for four hours on a stretch and send my pulse up to a hundred and make me feel those thrilly thrills I’ve always longed for.”</p>
			<p id="id01707">“But surely⁠—” said I.</p>
			<p id="id01708">“No, I’m beginning to be afraid not, beautiful, though of course I used to be crazy about Billy Woods; and then once I was engaged to another man for a long time, and I was perfectly devoted to him, but he <i>never</i> made me feel a single thrilly thrill. And would you believe it, Mr. Townsend?⁠—after a while he came back, precisely as though he had been a bad penny or a cat. He had been in the Boer War and came home just a night before I left, wounded and promoted several times and completely covered with glory and brass buttons. He came seven miles to see me, and I thoroughly enjoyed seeing him, for I had on my best dress and was feeling rather talkative. Well! at ten I was quite struck on him. At eleven perfectly willing to part friends, and at twelve <i>crazy</i> for him to go. He stayed till half-past, and I didn’t want to think of him for days. And, by the way, I am Miss Hugonin, and I hope you and Avis will be very happy. <i>Good-bye!</i>”</p>
			<p id="id01709">“Good-bye!” said I.</p>
			<p id="id01710" style="margin-top: 2em">2</p>
			<p id="id01711">And that, oddly enough, was the one private talk I ever had with the Margaret Hugonin whom, for some two weeks, I had believed myself to be upon the verge of marrying; for the next time I conversed with her alone she was Mrs. William Woods.</p>
			<p id="id01712">“Oh, go away, Billy!” she then said, impatiently “How often will I have to tell you it isn’t decent to be always hanging around your wife? Oh, you dear little crooked-necktied darling!”⁠—and she remedied the fault on tiptoe⁠—”<i>please</i> run away and make love to somebody else, and be sure to get her name right, so that I shan’t assassinate the wrong person⁠—because I want to tell this very attractive child all about Avis, and not be bothered.” And subsequently she did.</p>
			<p id="id01713">But I must not forestall her confidences, lest I get my cart even further in advance of my nominal Pegasus than the loosely-made conveyance is at present lumbering.</p>
			<p id="id01714" style="margin-top: 2em">3</p>
			<p id="id01715">And meanwhile Peter Blagden and I had called at Selwoode once or twice in unison and due estate. And Peter considered “Miss Beechinor a damn fine girl, and Miss Hugonin too, only⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01716">“Only,” I prompted, between puffs, “Miss Hugonin keeps everybody, as my old Mammy used to say, ‘in a perpetual swivet.’ I never understood what the phrase meant, precisely, but I somehow always knew that it was eloquent.”</p>
			<p id="id01717">“Just so,” said Peter. “You prefer⁠—ah⁠—a certain amount of tranquillity. I haven’t been abroad for a long while,” said Mr. Blagden; and then, after another meditative pause: “Now Stella⁠—well, Stella was a damn sight too good for me, of course⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01718">“She was,” I affably assented.</p>
			<p id="id01719">“⁠—and I’d be the very last man in the world to deny it. But still you <i>do</i> prefer⁠—” Then Peter broke off short and said: “My God, Bob! what’s the matter?”</p>
			<p id="id01720">So I think I must have had the ill-taste to have laughed a little over Mr. Blagden’s magnanimity in regard to Stella’s foibles. But I only said: “Oh, nothing, Peter! I was just going to tell you that travelling <i>does</i> broaden the mind, and that you will find an overcoat indispensable in Switzerland, and that during the voyage you ought to keep in the open air as much as possible, and that you should give the steward who waits on you at table at least ten shillings⁠—I was just going to tell you, in fine, that you would be a fool to squander any money on a guide-book, when I am here to give you all the necessary pointers.”</p>
			<p id="id01721">“But I didn’t mean to go to Europe exactly,” said Mr. Blagden; “⁠—I just meant to go abroad in a general sense. Any place would be abroad, you know, where people weren’t always remembering how rich you were, and weren’t scrambling to marry you out of hand, but really cared, you know, like she does. Oh, may be it <i>is</i> bad form to mention it, but I couldn’t help seeing how she looked at you, Bob. And it waked something⁠—Oh, I don’t know what I mean,” said Peter⁠—“it’s just damn foolishness, I suppose.”</p>
			<p id="id01722">“It’s very far from that,” I said; and I was honestly moved, just as I always am when pathos, preferably grotesque, has caught me unprepared. This millionaire was lonely, because of his millions, and Stella was dead; and somehow I understood, and laid one hand upon his shoulder.</p>
			<p id="id01723">“Oh, <i>you</i> can’t help it, I suppose, if all women love by ordinary because he is so like another person, where as men love because she is so different. My poor caliph, I would sincerely advise you to play the fool just as you plan to do⁠—oh, anywhere⁠—and without even a Mesrour. In fine go Bunburying at once. For very frankly, First Cousin of the Moon, it is the one thing worth while in life.”</p>
			<p id="id01724">“I half believe I will,” said Peter.⁠ ⁠… So he was packing in the interim during which I pretended to be writing, and was in reality fretting to think that, whilst Avis was in England by this, I could not decently leave America until those last five chapters were finished. So, in part as an excuse for not scrawling the dullest of nonsense and subsequently tearing it up, I fell to considering the unquestionable fact that I was in love with Avis, and upon the verge of marrying her, and was in consequence, as a matter of plain logic, deliriously happy.</p>
			<p id="id01725">“For when you are in love with a woman you, of course, want to marry her more than you want anything else. In nature, it is a serious and⁠—well, an almost irretrievable business. And I shall have to cultivate the domestic virtues and smoke cheaper cigarettes and all that, but I shall be glad to do every one of these things, for her sake⁠—after a while. I shall probably enjoy doing them.”</p>
			<p id="id01726">And I read Bettie Hamlyn’s letter for the seventeenth time.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p id="id01727" style="margin-top: 2em">4</p>
			<p id="id01728">For Bettie had answered the wild rhapsody which I wrote to tell her how much in love I was with Elena Barry-Smith. And in the nature of things I had not written Bettie again to tell her I was, and by a deal the more, in love with Avis Beechinor. The task was delicate, the reasons for my not unnatural change were such as you must transmit in a personal interview during which you are particularly boyish and talk very fast.</p>
			<p id="id01729">Besides, I do not like writing letters; and moreover, there was no real need to write. I was going to Gridlington; what more natural than to ride over to Fairhaven some clear morning and tell Bettie everything? I pictured her surprise and her delight at seeing me, and reflected it would be unfair to her to render an inaccurate account of matters, such as any letter must necessarily give.</p>
			<p id="id01730">Only, first, there was the garden of Peter’s aunt⁠—which sounds like an introductory French exercise⁠—and then Avis came. And, somehow, I had not, in consequence, traversed the scant nine miles that lay as yet between me and Bettie Hamlyn. I kept on meaning to do it the next day.</p>
			<p id="id01731">And the next day after this I really did.</p>
			<p id="id01732">“For I ought to tell Bettie about everything,” I reflected. “No matter if the engagement is a secret, I ought to tell Bettie about it.”</p>
			<p id="id01733" style="margin-top: 2em">5</p>
			<p id="id01734">When I had done so, Bettie shook her head. “Oh, Robin, Robin!” she said, “how did I ever come to raise a child that doesn’t know his own mind for as much as two minutes? And how dared that Barry-Smith person to slap you, I would like to know.”</p>
			<p id="id01735">“Now you’re jealous, Bettie. You are thinking she infringed upon an entirely personal privilege, and you resent it.”</p>
			<p id="id01736">“Well⁠—but I’ve the right to, you see, and she hadn’t. I consider her to be a bold-faced jig. And I don’t approve of this Avis person either, you understand; but we poor mothers are always being annoyed by slushy, mushy Avises. I suppose there’s a reason for it. She’ll throw you over, you know, as soon as <i>her</i> mother has had an inning or two. That’s why she took her to Europe,” Bettie explained, with a fine confusion of personalities. “Only she just wanted any quiet place where she could take aromatic spirits of ammonia and point out between doses that she has given up her entire life to her child and has never made any demands on her and hasn’t the strength to argue with her, because her heart is simply broken. We mothers always say that; and the funny part is that if you say it often enough it invariably works far better than any possible argument.”</p>
			<p id="id01737">I told her she was talking nonsense, and she said, irrelevantly enough: “Setebos, and Setebos, and Setebos! I don’t think very highly of Setebos sometimes, because He muddles things so. Oh, well, I shan’t cry Willow. Besides there <i>aren’t</i> any sycamore-trees in the garden. So let’s go into the garden, dear. That sounds as if I ate in the back pantry, doesn’t it? Of course you aren’t of any account any more, and you never will be, but at least you don’t look at people as though they were a new sort of bug whenever they have just thought a sentence or two and then gone on, without bothering to say it.”</p>
			<p id="id01738">So we went into Bettie’s garden. It had not changed.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p id="id01739" style="margin-top: 2em">6</p>
			<p id="id01740">Nothing had changed. It was as though I had somehow managed, after all, to push back the hands of the clock. Fairhaven accepted me incuriously. I was only “an old student.” In addition, I was vaguely rumoured to write “pieces” for the magazines. Probably I did; “old students” were often prone to vagaries after leaving King’s College; for instance, they told me, Ralph Means was a professional gambler, and Ox Selwyn had lately gone to Shanghai and had settled there⁠—and Shanghai, in common with most other places, Fairhaven accorded the negative tribute of just not absolutely disbelieving in its existence.</p>
			<p id="id01741">Nothing had changed. The Finals were over; and with the noisy exodus of the college-boys, Fairhaven had sunk contentedly into an even deeper stupor, as Fairhaven always does in summer. And, for the rest, the unpaved sidewalks were just as dusty, the same deep ruts and the puddles which never dry, not even in mid-August, adorned Fairhaven’s single street; the comfortable moss upon Fairhaven’s roofs had not varied by a shade; and George Washington or Benjamin Franklin might have stepped out of any one of those brass-knockered doorways without incongruity and without finding any noticeable innovation to marvel at.</p>
			<p id="id01742">Nothing had changed. In the precise middle of the campus Lord Penniston, our Governor in Colonial days, still posed, in dingy marble; and the fracture of the finger I had inadvertently broken off, the night that Billy Woods and I painted the statue all over, in six colours, was white and new-looking. Kathleen Eppes had married her Spaniard and had left Fairhaven; otherwise the same girls were already planning their toilets for the Y.M.C.A. reception in October, which formally presents the “new students” to society at large; and presently these girls would be going to the germans or the Opera House with the younger brother of the boy who used to take them thither.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p id="id01743">Nothing had changed; not even I was changed. For I had soon discovered that Bettie Hamlyn did not care a pin for me in myself. She was simply very fond of me because, at times, I reminded her of a boy who had gone to King’s College; and her reception of me, for the first two days, was unmistakably provisional.</p>
			<p id="id01744">“Very well!” I said.</p>
			<p id="id01745">And I did it. For I knew how difficult it was to deceive Bettie, and in consequence all my faculties rose to the challenge. I did not merely mimic my former self, I was compelled, almost, to believe I was indeed that former self, because not otherwise could I get Bettie Hamlyn’s toleration. Had I paused even momentarily to reflect upon the excellence of my acting, she would have known. So I resolutely believed I was being perfectly candid; and with constant use those older tricks of speech and gesture and almost of thought, at first laborious mimicry, became well-nigh involuntary.</p>
			<p id="id01746">In fine, we could not wipe away five years, but with practice we found that you would very often forget them, and for quite a while.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p id="id01747">I had explained to Bettie’s father I was going to board with them that summer. Had I not been so haphazard in the progress of this narrative, I would have earlier announced that Bettie’s father was the Latin professor at King’s College. He was very old and vague, and his general attitude toward the universe was that of remote recollection of having noticed something of the sort before. Professor Hamlyn, therefore, told me he was glad to hear of my intended stay beneath his roof; hazarded the speculation that I had written a book which he meant to read upon the very first opportunity; blinked once or twice; and forthwith lapsed into consideration of some Pliocene occurrence which, if you were to judge by the expression of his mild old countenance, he did not find entirely satisfactory.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p id="id01748">So I spent three months in Fairhaven; and Bettie and I read all the old books over again, and were perfectly happy.</p>
			<p id="id01749" style="margin-top: 2em">7</p>
			<p id="id01750">And what I wrote in those last five chapters of my book was so good that in common decency I was compelled to alter the preceding twenty-nine and bring them a bit nearer to Bettie’s standard. For I was utilising Bettie’s ideas. She did not have the knack of putting them on paper; that was my trivial part, as I now recognised with a sort of scared reverence.</p>
			<p id="id01751">“Of course, though, you had to meddle,” I would scold at her. “I had meant the infernal thing to be a salable book. To-day it is just a stenographic report of how these people elected to behave. I haven’t anything to do with it. I wash my hands of it. I consider you, in fine, a cormorant, a conscienceless marauder, a meddlesome Mattie, <i>and</i> a born dramatist.”</p>
			<p id="id01752">“But, it’s <i>much</i> better than anything you’ve ever done, Robin⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01753">“That is what I’m grumbling about. I consider it very unfeeling of you to write better novels than I do,” I retorted. “But, oh, how good that scene is!” I said, a little later.</p>
			<p id="id01754">“Let’s see⁠—‘For you, dear clean-souled girl, were born to be the wife of a strong man, and the mother of his dirty children’⁠—no, it’s ‘sturdy,’ but then you hardly ever cross your T’s. And where he goes on to tell her he can’t marry her, because he is artistic, and she is too practical for them to be real mates, and all that other feeble-mindedness? Dear me, did I forget to tell you we were going to cut that out?”</p>
			<p id="id01755">“But I particularly like that part⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01756">“Do you?” said Bettie, as her pen scrunched vicious lines through it. Then she said: “I only hope she had the civility and self-control not to laugh until you had gone away. And ‘We irrelevant folk that design all useless and beautiful things,’ indeed! No, I couldn’t have blamed her if she laughed right out. I wonder if you will never understand that what you take to be your love for beautiful things is really just a dislike of ugly ones? Oh, I’ve no patience with you! And wanting to print it in a book, too, instead of being content to make yourself ridiculous in tete-a-tetes with minxes that don’t especially matter!”</p>
			<p id="id01757">“Well⁠—! Anyhow, I agree with you that, thanks to your editing and carping and general scurrility, this book is going to be,” I meekly stated, “a little better than <i>The Apostates</i> and not just ‘pretty much like any other book.’”</p>
			<p id="id01758">“Do you know that’s just what I was thinking,” said Bettie, dolefully. She clasped both hands behind her crinkly small black head, and in that queer habitual pose appraised me, from between her elbows, in that way which always made me feel I had better be careful. “Damn you!” was her verdict.</p>
			<p id="id01759">“Whence this unmaidenliness?” I queried, with due horror.</p>
			<p id="id01760">“You are trying to prove to me that it has been worth while. This nasty book is coming alive, here in our own eight-cornered room, with a horrid crawly life of its own that it would never have had if you hadn’t been learning things my boy knew nothing about. That’s what you are crowing in my face, when you keep quiet and smirk. Oh, but I know you!”</p>
			<p id="id01761">“You do think, then, that, between you and me, it is really coming alive?”</p>
			<p id="id01762">“Yes⁠—if that greatly matters to the fat literary gent that I don’t care for greatly. Yes, the infernal thing will be a Book, with quite a sizable B. I am feeding its maw with more important things than a few ideas, though. The thing is a monster that isn’t worth its keep. For my boy was worth more than a Book,” she said, forlornly⁠—“oh, oceans more!”</p>
			<p id="id01763" style="margin-top: 2em">8</p>
			<p id="id01764">All in all, we were a deal more than happy during these three very hot months. It was a sort of Lotus Eaters’ existence, shared by just us two, with Josiah Clarriker intruding occasionally, and with echoes from the outer world, when heard at all, resounding very dimly and unimportantly. I began almost to assume, as Fairhaven tacitly assumed, that there was really no outer world, or none at least to be considered seriously.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p id="id01765">For instance: Marian Winwood had come to Lichfield, and wrote me from there, “hoping that we would renew an acquaintance which she remembered so pleasurably.” It did not seem worth while, of course, to answer the minx; I decided, at a pinch, to say that the Fairhaven mail-service was abominable, and that her letter had never reached me. But the young fellow who two years ago had wandered about the Green Chalybeate with her had become, now, as unreal as she. I glimpsed the couple, with immeasurable aloofness, as phantoms flickering about the mirage of a brook, throwing ghostly bread crumbs to Lethean minnows.</p>
			<p id="id01766">And then, too, when the police caught Ned Lethbury that summer, it hardly seemed worth while to wonder about his wife. For she was, inexplicably, with him, all through the trial at Chiswick, you may remember, though you were probably more interested at the time by the Humbert trial in Paris. In any event, no rumor came to me in Fairhaven to connect Amelia Lethbury with Nadine Neroni, but, instead, a deal of journalistic pity and sympathy for her, the faithful, much-enduring wife. Still quite a handsome woman, they said, for all her suffering and poverty.⁠ ⁠… And when he went to the penitentiary, Amelia Lethbury disappeared, nobody knew whither, except that I suspected Anton von Anspach knew. I could not explain the mystery. I did not greatly care to, for to me it did not seem important, now.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p id="id01767" style="margin-top: 2em">9</p>
			<p id="id01768">Meantime, I meditated.</p>
			<p id="id01769">“I am in love with Avis⁠—oh, granted! I am not the least bit in love with⁠—we will euphemistically say ‘anyone else.’ But confound it! I am coming to the conclusion that marrying a woman because you happen to be in love with her is about as logical a proceeding as throwing the cat out of the window because the rhododendrons are in bloom. Why, if I marry Avis I shall probably have to live with her the rest of my life!</p>
			<p id="id01770">“What if that obsolete notion of Schopenhauer’s were true after all⁠—that love is a blind instinct which looks no whit toward the welfare of the man and woman it dominates, but only to the equipment a child born of them would inherit? What if, after all, love tends, without variation, to yoke the most incompatible in order that the average type of humanity may be preserved? Then the one passion we esteem as sacred would be simply the deranged condition of any other beast in rutting-time. Then we, with the pigs and sparrows, would be just so many pieces on the chess-board, and our evolutions would be just a friendly trial of skill between what we call life and death.</p>
			<p id="id01771">“I love Avis Beechinor. But I have loved, in all sincerity, many other women, and I rejoice to-day, unfeignedly, that I never married any of them. For marriage means a life-long companionship, a long, long journey wherein must be adjusted, one by one, each tiniest discrepancy between the fellow-wayfarers; and always a pebble if near enough to the eye will obscure a mountain.</p>
			<p id="id01772">“Why, Avis cannot attempt a word of four syllables without coming at least once to grief! It is a trifle of course, but in a life-long companionship there are exactly fourteen thousand trifles to one event of importance. And deuce take it! the world is populated by men and women, not demi-gods; the poets are specious and abandoned rhetoricians; for it never was, and never will be, possible to love anybody ‘to the level of every-day’s Most quiet need by sun or candlelight.’</p>
			<p id="id01773">“Or not to me at least.</p>
			<p id="id01774">“In a sentence, when it comes to a life-long companionship, I prefer not the woman who would make me absolutely happy for a twelvemonth, but rather the woman with whom I could chat contentedly for twenty years, and who would keep me to the mark. I am rather tired of being futile; and not for any moral reason, but because it is not worthy of <i>me</i>. In fine, I do not want to die entirely. I want to leave behind some not inadequate expression of Robert Etheridge Townsend, and I do not care at all what people say of it, so that it is here when I am gone. Oh, Stella understood! ‘I want my life to count, I want to leave something in the world that wasn’t there before I came.’</p>
			<p id="id01775">“Now Bettie⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01776">I arose resolutely. “I had much better go for a long, and tedious, and jolting, and universally damnable walk. Bettie would make something vital of me⁠—if I could afford her the material⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01777">And I grinned a little. “ ‘Go, therefore, now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.’ Yes, you would certainly have need of a miracle, dear Bettie⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id01778" style="margin-top: 2em">10</p>
			<p id="id01779">I started for that walk I was to take. But Dr. Jeal and Colonel Snawley were seated in armchairs in front of Clarriker’s Emporium, just as they had been used to sit there in my college days, enjoying, as the Colonel mentioned, “the cool of the evening,” although to the casual observer the real provider of their pleasure would have appeared to be an unlimited supply of chewing-tobacco.</p>
			<p id="id01780">So I lingered here, and garnered, to an accompaniment of leisurely expectorations, much knowledge as to the fall crops and the carryings-on of the wife of a celebrated general, upon whose staff the Colonel had served during the War⁠—and there has never been in the world’s history but one war, so far as Fairhaven is concerned⁠—and how the Colonel walked right in on them, and how it was hushed up.</p>
			<p id="id01781">Then we discussed the illness of Pope Leo and what everybody knew about those derned cardinals, and the riots in Evansville, and the Panama Canal business, and the squally look of things at Port Arthur, and attributed all these imbroglios, I think, to the Republican administration. Even at our bitterest, though, we conceded that “Teddy’s” mother was a Bulloch, and that his uncle fired the last shot before the Alabama went down. And that inclined us to forgive him everything, except of course, the Booker Washington luncheon.</p>
			<p id="id01782">Then half a block farther on, Mrs. Rabbet wanted to know if I had ever seen such weather, and to tell me exactly what Adrian, Junior⁠—no longer little Adey, no indeed, sir, but ready to start right in at the College session after next, and as she often said to Mr. Rabbet you could hardly believe it⁠—had observed the other day, and quick as a flash too, because it would make such a funny story. Only she could never quite decide whether it happened on a Tuesday or a Wednesday, so that, after precisely seven digressions on this delicate point, the denouement of the tale, I must confess, fell rather flat.</p>
			<p id="id01783">And then Mab Spessifer demanded that I come up on the porch and draw some pictures for her. The child was waiting with three sheets of paper and a chewed pencil all ready, just on the chance that I might pass; and you cannot very well refuse a cripple who adores you and is not able to play with the other brats. You get instead into a kind of habit of calling every day and trying to make her laugh, because she is such a helpless little nuisance.</p>
			<p id="id01784">And tousled mothers weep over you in passageways and tell you how good you are, and altogether the entire affair is tedious; but having started it, you keep it up, somehow.</p>
			<p id="id01785" style="margin-top: 2em">11</p>
			<p id="id01786">In fine, it is a symbol that I never took the walk which was to dust the cobwebs from my brain and make me just like all the other persons, thick about me, who grow up, and mate, and beget, and die, in the incurious fashion of oxen, without ever wondering if there is any plausible reason for doing it; and my brief progress was upon the surface very like that of the bedeviled fellow in <i>Les Facheux</i>. Yet I enjoyed it somehow. Never to be hurried, and always to stop and talk with every person whom you meet, upon topics in which no conceivable human being could possibly be interested, may not sound attractive, but in Fairhaven it is the rule; and, oddly enough, it breeds, in practice, a sort of family feeling⁠—if only by entitling everybody to the condoned and matter-of-course stupidity of aunts and uncles⁠—which is not really all unpleasant.</p>
			<p id="id01787">So I went home at half-past seven, to supper and to Bettie, in a quite contented frame of mind. It did not seem conceivable that any world so beautiful and stupid and well-meaning could have either the heart or the wit to thwart my getting anything I really wanted; and the thought elated me.</p>
			<p id="id01788">Only I did not know, precisely, what I wanted.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
