<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<p style="margin-top: 4em">23.</p>
			<p>
				<i>He Reviles Destiny and Climbs a Wall</i>
			</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">But now the spring was come again, and, as always at this season, I was pricked with vague longings to have done with roofs and paven places. I wanted to be in the open. I think I wanted to fall in love with somebody, and thereby somewhat to prolong the daily half-minute, immediately after awakening in the morning, during which I did not think about Elena Risby.</p>
			<p>I was bored in Lichfield. For nothing of much consequence seemed, as I yawned over the morning paper, to be happening anywhere. The Illinois Legislature had broken up in a free fight, a British square had been broken in Somaliland, and at the Aqueduct track Alado had broken his jockey’s neck. A mob had chased a negro up Broadway: Russia had demanded that China cede the sovereignty of Manchuria; and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lyman Abbott was explaining why the notion of equal suffrage had been abandoned finally by thinking people.</p>
			<p>Such negligible matters contributed not at all to the comfort or the discomfort of Robert Etheridge Townsend; and I was pricked with vague sweet longings to have done with roofs and paven places. If only I possessed a country estate, a really handsome Manor or a Grange, I was reflecting as I looked over the “Social Items,” and saw that Miss Hugonin and Colonel Hugonin had re-opened Selwoode for the summer months.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>So I decided I would go to Gridlington, whither Peter Blagden had forgotten to invite me. He was extremely glad to see me, though, to do him justice. For Peter⁠—by this time the inheritor of his unlamented uncle’s estate⁠—had, very properly, developed gout, which is, I take it, the time-honoured appendage of affluence and, so to speak, its trade-mark; and was, for all his wealth, unable to get up and down the stairs of his fine house without, as we will delicately word it, the display and, at times, the overtaxing of a copious vocabulary.</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">2</p>
			<p>I was at Gridlington entirely comfortable. It was spring, to begin with, and out of doors in spring you always know, at twenty-five, that something extremely pleasant is about to happen, and that She is quite probably around the very next turn of the lane.</p>
			<p>Moreover, there was at Gridlington a tiny private garden which had once been the recreation of Peter Blagden’s aunt (dead now twelve years ago), and which had remained untended since her cosseting; and I in nature took charge of it.</p>
			<p>There was in the place a wilding peach-tree, which I artistically sawed into shape and pruned and grafted, and painted all those profitable wounds with tar; and I grew to love it, just as most people do their children, because it was mine. And Peter, who is a person of no sensibility, wanted to ring for a servant one night, when there was a hint of frost and I had started out to put a bucket of water under my tree to protect it. I informed him that he was irrevocably dead to all the nobler sentiments, and went to the laundry and got a wash-tub.</p>
			<p>Peter was not infrequently obtuse. He would contend, for instance, that it was absurd for any person to get so gloriously hot and dirty while setting out plants, when that person objected to having a flower in the same room. For Peter could not understand that a cut flower is a dead or, at best, a dying thing, and therefore to considerate people is just so much abhorrent carrion; and denied it would be really quite as rational to decorate your person or your dinner table with the severed heads of chickens as with those of daffodils.</p>
			<p>“But that is only because you are not particularly bright,” I told him. “Oh, I suppose you can’t help it. But why make <i>all</i> the actions of your life so foolish? What good do you get out of having the gout, for instance?”</p>
			<p>Whereupon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagden desired to be informed if I considered those with-various-adjectives-accompanied twinges in that qualified foot to be a source of personal pleasure to the owner of the very-extensively-hiatused foot. In which case, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagden felt at liberty to express his opinion of my intellectual attainments, which was of an uncomplimentary nature.</p>
			<p>“Because, you know,” I pursued, equably, “you wouldn’t have the gout if you did not habitually overeat yourself and drink more than is good for you. In consequence, here you are at thirty-two with a foot the same general size and shape as a hayrick, only rather less symmetrical, and quite unable to attend to the really serious business of life, which is to present me to the heiress. It is a case of vicarious punishment which strikes me as extremely unfair. You have made of your stomach a god, Peter, and I am the one to suffer for it. You have made of your stomach,” I continued, venturing aspiringly into metaphor, “a brazen Moloch, before which you are now calmly preparing to immolate my prospects in life. You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Peter!”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagden’s next observation was describable as impolite.</p>
			<p>“Fate, too,” I lamented, in a tragic voice, “appears to have entered into this nefarious conspiracy. Here, not two miles away, is one of the greatest heiresses in America⁠—clever, I am told, beautiful, I am sure, for I have yet to discover a woman who sees anything in the least attractive about her⁠—and, above all, with the Woods millions at her disposal. Why, Peter, Margaret Hugonin is the woman I have been looking for these last three years. She is, to a hair, the sort of woman I have always intended to make unhappy. And I can’t even get a sight of her! Here are you, laid up with the gout, and unable to help me; and yonder is the heiress, making a foolish pretence at mourning for the old curmudgeon who left her all that money, and declining to meet people. Oh, but she is a shiftless woman, Peter! At this very moment she might be getting better acquainted with me; at this very moment, Peter, I might be explaining to her in what points she is utterly and entirely different from all the other women I have ever known. And she prefers to immure herself in Selwoode, with no better company than her father, that ungodly old retired colonel, and a she-cousin, somewhere on the undiscussable side of forty⁠—when she might be engaging me in amorous dalliance! That Miss Hugonin is a shiftless woman, I tell you! And Fate⁠—oh, but Fate, too, is a vixenish jade!” I cried, and shook my fist under the nose of an imaginary Lachesis.</p>
			<p>“You appear,” said Peter, drily, “to be unusually well-informed as to what is going on at Selwoode.”</p>
			<p>“You flatter me,” I answered, as with proper modesty. “You must remember that there are maids at Selwoode. You must remember that my man Byam, is⁠—and will be until that inevitable day when he will attempt to blackmail me, and I shall kill him in the most lingering fashion I can think of⁠—that Byam is, I say, something of a diplomatist.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagden regarded me with disapproval.</p>
			<p>“So you’ve been sending your nigger cousin over to Selwoode to spy for you! You’re a damn cad, you know, Bob,” he pensively observed. “Now most people think that when you carry on like a lunatic you’re simply acting on impulse. I don’t. I believe you plan it out a week ahead. I sometimes think you are the most adroit and unblushing looker-out for number one I ever knew; and I can’t for the life of me understand why I don’t turn you out of doors.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know where you picked up your manners,” said I, reflectively, “but it must have been in devilish low company. I would cut your acquaintance, Peter, if I could afford it.” Then I fell to pacing up and down the floor. “I incline, as you have somewhat grossly suggested, to a certain favouritism among the digits. And why the deuce shouldn’t I? A fortune is the only thing I need. I have good looks, you know, of a sort; ah, I’m not vain, but both my glass and a number of women have been kind enough to reassure me on this particular point. And that I have a fair amount of wits my creditors will attest, who have lived promise-crammed for the last year or two, feeding upon air like chameleons. Then I have birth⁠—not that good birth ensures anything but bad habits though, for you will observe that, by some curious freak of nature, an old family-tree very seldom produces anything but wild oats. And, finally, I have position. I can introduce my wife into the best society; ah, yes, you may depend upon it, Peter, she will have the privilege of meeting the very worst and stupidest and silliest people in the country on perfectly equal terms. You will perceive, then, that the one desirable thing I lack is wealth. And this I shall naturally expect my wife to furnish. So, the point is settled, and you may give me a cigarette.”</p>
			<p>Peter handed me the case, with a snort. “You are a hopelessly conceited ass,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagden was pleased to observe, “for otherwise you would have learned, by this, that you’ll, most likely, never have the luck of Charteris, and land a woman who will take it as a favour that you let her pay your bills. God knows you’ve angled for enough of ’em!”</p>
			<p>“You are painfully coarse, Peter,” I pointed out, with a sigh. “Indeed, your general lack of refinement might easily lead one to think you owed your millions to your own thrifty industry, or some equally unpleasant attribute, rather than to your uncle’s very commendable and lucrative innovation in the line of⁠—well, I remember it was something extremely indigestible, but, for the moment, I forget whether it was steam-reapers or a new sort of pickle. Yes, in a great many respects, you are hopelessly parvenuish. This cigarette-case, for instance⁠—studded with diamonds and engraved with a monogram big enough for a coach-door! Why, Peter, it simply reeks with the ostentation of honestly acquired wealth⁠—and with very good tobacco, too, by the way. I shall take it, for I am going for a walk, and I haven’t any of my own. And some day I shall pawn this jewelled abortion, Peter⁠—pawn it for much fine gold; and upon the proceeds I shall make merriment for myself and for my friends.” And I pocketed the case.</p>
			<p>“That’s all very well,” Peter growled, “but you needn’t try to change the subject. You know you <i>have</i> angled after any number of rich women who have had sense enough, thank God, to refuse you. You didn’t use to be⁠—but now you’re quite notoriously good-for-nothing.”</p>
			<p>“It is the one blemish,” said I, sweetly, “upon an otherwise perfect character. And it is true,” I continued, after an interval of meditation, “that I have, in my time, encountered some very foolish women. There was, for instance, Elena Barry-Smith, who threw me over for Warwick Risby; and Celia Reindan, who had the bad taste to prefer Teddy Anstruther; and Rosalind Jemmett, who is, very inconsiderately, going to marry Tom Gelwix, instead of me. These were staggeringly foolish women, Peter, but while their taste is bad, their dinners are good, so I have remained upon the best of terms with them. They have trodden me under their feet, but I am the long worm that has no turning. Moreover, you are doubtless aware of the axiomatic equality between the fish in the sea and those out of it. I hope before long to better my position in life. I hope⁠—Ah, well, that would scarcely interest you. Good morning, Peter. And I trust, when I return,” I added, with chastening dignity, “that you will evince a somewhat more Christian spirit toward the world in general, and that your language will be rather less reminiscent of the blood-stained buccaneer of historical fiction.”</p>
			<p>“You’re a grinning buffoon,” said Peter. “You’re a fat Jack-pudding.<br/>
			You’re an ass. Where are you going, anyway?”<br/></p>
			<p>“I am going,” said I, “to the extreme end of Gridlington. Afterward I am going to climb the wall that stands between Gridlington and Selwoode.”</p>
			<p>“And after that?” said Peter.</p>
			<p>I gave a gesture. “Why, after that,” said I, “fortune will favour the brave. And I, Peter, am very, very brave.”</p>
			<p>Then I departed, whistling. In view of all my memories it had been strangely droll to worry Peter Blagden into an abuse of marrying for money. For this was on the twenty-eighth of April, the anniversary of the day that Stella had died, you may remember.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p style="margin-top: 2em">3</p>
			<p>And a half-hour subsequently, true to my word, I was scaling a ten-foot stone wall, thickly overgrown with ivy. At the top of it I paused, and sat down to take breath and to meditate, my legs meanwhile bedangling over an as flourishing Italian garden as you would wish to see.</p>
			<p>“Now, I wonder,” I queried, of my soul, “what will be next? There is a very cheerful uncertainty about what will be next. It may be a spring-gun, and it may be a bull-dog, and it may be a susceptible heiress. But it is apt to be⁠—No, it isn’t,” I amended, promptly; “it is going to be an angel. Or perhaps it is going to be a dream. She can’t be real, you know⁠—I am probably just dreaming her. I would be quite certain I was just dreaming her, if this wall were not so humpy and uncomfortable. For it stands to reason, I would not be fool enough to dream of such unsympathetic iron spikes as I am sitting on.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you are not aware,” hazarded a soprano voice, “that this is private property?”</p>
			<p>“Why, no,” said I, very placidly; “on the contrary I was just thinking it must be heaven. And I am tolerably certain,” I commented further, in my soul, “that you are one of the more influential seraphim.”</p>
			<p>The girl had lifted her brows. She sat upon a semi-circular stone bench, some twenty feet from the wall, and had apparently been reading, for a book lay open in her lap. She now inspected me, with a sort of languid wonder in her eyes, and I returned the scrutiny with unqualified approval in mine.</p>
			<p>And in this I had reason. The heiress of Selwoode was eminently good to look upon.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
