<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII: He Goes Mad in a Garden</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">He Goes Mad in a Garden</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-7-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>“And, oh, but it is good to be with you again, Signorina!” cried I, as I came with quick strides into the moonlit garden. I caught both her hands in mine, and laughed like an ineffably contented person. There was nothing very subtle about the boy that then was I; at worst, he overacted what he really felt; and just at present he was pleased with the universe, and he saw no possible reason for concealing the fact.</p>
				<p>It was characteristic, also, that she made no pretence at being surprised by my coming. She was expecting me and she smiled very frankly at seeing me. Also, in place of the street dress of Tuesday, she wore something that was white and soft and clinging, and left her throat but half concealed. This, for two reasons, was sensible and praiseworthy; one being that the night was warm, and the other that it really broadened my ideas as to the state of perfection which it is possible for the human throat to attain.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>“So you don’t like my stage-name?” she asked, as I sat down beside her. “Well, for that matter, no more do I.”</p>
				<p>“It doesn’t suit you,” I protested⁠—“not in the least. Whereas, you might be a Signorina Somebody-or-other, you know. You are dark and stately and⁠—well, I can’t tell you all the things you are,” I complained, “because the English language is so abominably limited. But, upon the whole, I am willing to take the word of the playbill⁠—yes, I am quite willing to accept you as Signorina Capulet. She had a habit of sitting in gardens at night, I remember. Yes,” I decided, after reflection, “I really think it highly probable that you are old Capulet’s daughter. I shall make a point of it to pick a quarrel as soon as possible, with that impertinent, trespassing young Montague. He really doesn’t deserve you, you know.”</p>
				<p>Unaccountably, her face saddened. Then, “Signorina? Signorina?” she appraised the title. “It <em>is</em> rather a pretty name. And the other is horrible. Yes, you may call me Signorina, if you like.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>She would not tell me her real name. She was unmarried⁠—this much she told me, but of her past life, her profession, or of her future she never spoke. “I don’t want to talk about it,” she said, candidly. “We play for a week in Fairhaven, and here, once off the stage, I intend to forget I am an actress. When I am on the stage,” she added, in meditative wise, “of course everyone knows I am not.”</p>
				<p>I laughed. I found her very satisfying; she was not particularly intelligent, perhaps, but then I was beginning to consider clever women rather objectionable creatures. There was a sufficiency of them among the Charteris house-party⁠—Alicia Wade, for instance, and Pauline Ashmeade and Cynthia Chaytor⁠—and I thought of them almost resentfully. The world had accorded them not exactly what they most wanted, perhaps, but, at least, they had its luxuries; and they said sharp, cynical things about the world in return. In a woman’s mouth epigrams were as much out-of-place as a meerschaum pipe.</p>
				<p>Here, on the contrary, was a woman whom the world had accorded nothing save hard knocks, and she regarded it, upon the whole, as an eminently pleasant place to live in. She accepted its rebuffs with a certain large calm, as being all in the day’s work. There was, no doubt, some good and sufficient reason for these inconveniences; not for a moment, however, did she puzzle her handsome head in speculating over this reason. She was probably too lazy. And the few favours the world accorded her she took thankfully.</p>
				<p>“You see,” she explained to me⁠—this was on Thursday night, when I found her contentedly eating cheap candy out of a paper bag⁠—“the world is really very like a large chocolate drop; it’s rather bitter on the outside, but when you have bitten through, you find the heart of it sweet. Oh, how greedy!⁠—you’ve taken the last candied cherry, and I am specially fond of candied cherries!” And indeed, she looked frankly regretful as I munched it.</p>
				<p>I thought her adorable; and in exchange for that last candied cherry I promised her some of the new books⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">David Harum</i> certainly, and, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">When Knighthood Was in Flower</i>, because everybody was reading it, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dooley</i>, because they said this young fellow Dunne was nearly as funny as Bill Nye.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>In fact, the moon seemed to shine down each night upon that particular garden in a more and more delightful and dangerous manner. And I being a fairly normal and healthy young man, the said moonshine affected me in a fashion which has been peculiar to moonshine since Noah was a likely stripling; my blood appeared to me, at times, to leap and bubble in my veins as if it had been some notably invigorating and heady tipple; and my heart was unreasonably contented, and I gave due thanks for this woman who had come to me unsullied through the world’s gutter. For she came unsullied; there was no questioning that.</p>
				<p>I pictured her in certain execrable rhymes as the Lady in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Comus</i>, moving serene and unafraid among a rabble of threatening, bestial shapes. And I rejoiced that there were women like this in the world⁠—brave, wholesome, unutterably honest women, whose very lack of cleverness⁠—oh, subtle appeal to my vanity!⁠—demanded a gentleman’s protection.</p>
				<p>As has been said, I was a well-grown lad, but when I thought in this fashion I seemed to myself, at a moderate computation, ten feet in height⁠—and just the person, in short, who would be an ideal protector.</p>
				<p>Thus far my callow meditations. My course of reasoning was perhaps faulty, but then there are, at twenty-one, many processes more interesting and desirable than the perfecting of a mathematical demonstration. And so, for a little, my blood rejoiced with a strange fervour in the summer moonlight, and it was good to be alive.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>Thursday was the twenty-third of the month, so upon that afternoon I wrote to Bettie Hamlyn, in far-off Colorado.</p>
				<p>It was a lengthy letter. It told her of how desolate her garden was and of how odd Fairhaven seemed without her. It told how I had half changed my mind, and would probably not go to Europe with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charteris, after all. Bettie had been at pains, in the letter I was answering, to expatiate upon her hatred of Charteris, whom she had never seen. My letter told her, in fine, of a variety of matters. And it ended:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>I went to the Opera House on Monday. But that, like everything else, isn’t the same without you, dear. The woman who played Juliet was, I believe, rather good-looking, but I scarcely noticed her in worrying over the pitiful circumstance that the Apothecary and the Populace of Verona had only one pair of shoes between them. Besides, Mercutio kept putting on a bathrobe and insisting he was Friar Laurence.⁠ ⁠… I would write more about it, if I had not almost used up all my paper. There is just room to say⁠—</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>This was, as I have stated, on Thursday afternoon. Upon the following evening⁠—</p>
				<p>“And why not?” I demanded, for the ninth time.</p>
				<p>But she was resolute. “Oh, it is dear of you!” she cried; “and I⁠—I do care for you⁠—how could I help it? But it can’t be⁠—it can’t ever be,” she repeated wearily; and then she looked at me, and smiled a little. “Oh, boy, boy! dear, dear boy!” she murmured, half in wonder, “how foolish of you and⁠—how dear of you!”</p>
				<p>“And why not?” said I⁠—for the tenth time.</p>
				<p>She gave a sobbing laugh. “Oh, the great, brave, stupid boy!” she said, and, for a moment, her hand rested on my hair; “he doesn’t know what he is doing⁠—ah, no, he doesn’t know! Why, I might hold you to your word! I might sue you for breach of promise! I might marry you out of hand! Think of that! Why I am only a strolling actress, and fair game for any man⁠—any man who isn’t particular,” she added, with the first trace of bitterness I had ever observed in her odd, throaty voice. “And you would marry me⁠—you! you would give me your name, you would make me your wife! You have actually begged me to be your wife, haven’t you? Ah, my brave, strong, stupid Bobbie, how many women must love you⁠—women who have a right to love you! And you would give them all up for me⁠—for me, you foolish Bobbie, whom you haven’t known a week! Ah, how dear of you!” And she caught her breath swiftly, and her voice broke.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” I brazenly confessed; “I really believe I would give them all up⁠—every blessed one of them⁠—for you.” I inspected her, critically, and then smiled. “And I don’t think that I would be deserving any very great credit for self sacrifice, either, Signorina.”</p>
				<p>“My dear,” she answered, “it pleases you to call me old Capulet’s daughter⁠—but if I were only a Capulet, and you a Montague, don’t you see how much easier it would be? But we don’t belong to rival families, we belong to rival worlds, to two worlds that have nothing in common, and never can have anything in common. They are too strong for us, Bobbie⁠—my big, dark, squalid world, that you could never sink to, and your gay little world which I can never climb to⁠—your world that would have none of me, even if⁠—even <em>if</em>⁠—” But the condition was not forthcoming.</p>
				<p>“The world,” said I, in an equable tone⁠—“My dear, I may as well warn you I am shockingly given to short and expressive terms, and as we are likely to see a deal of each other for the future, you will have to be lenient with them⁠—accordingly, I repeat, the world may be damned.”</p>
				<p>And I laughed, in unutterable content. “Have none of you!” I cried. “My faith, I would like to see a world which would have none of you! Ah, Signorina, it is very plain to me that you don’t realize what a beauty, what a⁠—a⁠—good Lord, what an unimaginative person it was that invented the English language! Why, you have only to be seen, heart’s dearest⁠—only to be seen, and the world is at your feet⁠—my world, to which you belong of rights; my world, that you are going to honour by living in; my world, that in a little will go mad for sheer envy of blundering, stupid, lucky me!” And I laughed her to scorn.</p>
				<p>There was a long silence. Then, “I belonged to your world once, you know.”</p>
				<p>“Why, of course, I knew as much as that.”</p>
				<p>“And yet⁠—you never asked⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Ah, Signorina, Signorina!” I cried; “what matter? Don’t I know you for the bravest, tenderest, purest, most beautiful woman God ever made? I doubt you⁠—I! My word!” said I, and stoutly, “that <em>would</em> be a pretty go! You are to tell me just what you please,” I went on, almost belligerently, “and when and where you please, my lady. And I would thank you,” I added, with appropriate sternness, “to discontinue your pitiful and transparent efforts to arouse unworthy suspicions as to my future wife. They are wasted, madam⁠—utterly wasted, I assure you.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, Bobbie, Bobbie!” she sighed; “you are such a beautiful baby! Give me time,” she pleaded weakly.</p>
				<p>And, when I scowled my disapproval, “Only till tomorrow⁠—only a little, little twenty-four hours. And promise me, you won’t speak of this⁠—this crazy nonsense again tonight. I must think.”</p>
				<p>“Never!” said I, promptly; “because I couldn’t be expected to keep such an absurd promise,” I complained, in indignation.</p>
				<p>“And you look so strong,” she murmured, with evident disappointment⁠—“so strong and firm and⁠—and⁠—admirable!”</p>
				<p>So I promised at once. And I kept the promise⁠—that is, I did subsequently refer to the preferable and proper course to pursue in divers given circumstances “when we are married”; but it was on six occasions only, and then quite casually⁠—and six times, as I myself observed, was, all things considered, an extremely moderate allowance and one that did great credit to my self-control.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>“And besides, why <em>not</em>?” I said⁠—for the eleventh time.</p>
				<p>“There are a thousand reasons. I am not your equal, I am just an ostensible actress⁠—Why, it would be your ruin!”</p>
				<p>“My dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Grundy, I confess that, for the moment, your disguise had deceived me. But now I recognize your voice.”</p>
				<p>She laughed a little. “And after all,” the grave voice said, which was, to me at least, the masterwork of God, “after all, hasn’t one always to answer <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Grundy⁠—in the end?”</p>
				<p>“Why, then, you disgusting old harridan,” said I, “I grant you it is utterly impossible to defend my behaviour in this matter, and, believe me, I don’t for an instant undertake the task. To the contrary, I agree with you perfectly⁠—my conduct is most thoughtless and reprehensible, and merits your very severest condemnation. For look you, here is a young man, well born, well-bred, sufficiently well endowed with this world’s goods, in short, an eminently eligible match, preparing to marry an ‘ostensible actress’ a year or two his senior⁠—why, of course, you are⁠—and of whose past he knows nothing⁠—absolutely nothing. Don’t you shudder at the effrontery of the minx? Is it not heartbreaking to contemplate the folly, the utter infatuation of the misguided youth who now stands ready to foist such a creature upon the circles of which your ladyship is a distinguished ornament? I protest it is really incredible. I don’t believe a word of it.”</p>
				<p>“I cannot quite believe it, either, Bobbie⁠—”</p>
				<p>“But you see, he loves her. You, my dear madam, blessed with a wiser estimation of our duties to society, of the responsibilities of our position, of the cost of even the most modest establishment, and, above all, of the sacredness of matrimony and the main chance, may well shrug your shoulders at such a plea. For, as you justly observe, what, after all, is this love? only a passing madness, an exploded superstition, an irresponsible ignis fatuus flickering over the quagmires and shallows of the divorce court. People’s lives are no longer swayed by such absurdities; it is quite out of date.”</p>
				<p>“Yes; you are joking, Bobbie, I know; yet it is really out of date⁠—”</p>
				<p>“But I protest, loudly, my hand upon my heart, that it is true; people no longer do mad things for love, or ever did, in spite of lying poets; any more than the birds mate in the spring, or the sun rises in the morning; popular fallacies, my dear madam, every one of them. You and I know better, and are not to be deceived by appearances, however specious they may be. Ah, but come now! Having attained this highly satisfactory condition, we can well afford to laugh at all our past mistakes⁠—yes, even at our own! For let us be quite candid. Wasn’t there a time, dear lady, before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grundy came a-wooing, when, somehow, one was constantly meeting unexpected people in the garden, and, somehow, one sat out a formidable number of dances during the evening, and, somehow, the poets seemed a bit more plausible than they do today? It was very foolish, of course⁠—but, ah, madam, there <em>was</em> a time⁠—a time when even our staid blood rejoiced with a strange fervour in the summer moonlight, and it was good to be alive! Come now, have you the face to deny it⁠—<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Methuselah?”</p>
				<p>“It has not been quite bad to be alive, these last few hours⁠—”</p>
				<p>“And, oh, my dear, how each of us will look back some day to this very moment! And we are wasting it! And I have not any words to tell you how I love you! I am just a poor, dumb brute!” I groaned.</p>
				<p>Then very tenderly she began to talk with me in a voice I cannot tell you of, and concerning matters not to be recorded.</p>
				<p>And still she would not promise anything; and I would give an arm, I think, could it replevin all the idiotic and exquisite misery I knew that night.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
