<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Prologue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="prologue" epub:type="prologue">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Which Deals with the Essentials</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="prologue-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Writing</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>It appeared to me that my circumstances clamored for betterment, because never in my life have I been able to endure the contact of unhappiness. And my mother was always crying now, over (though I did not know it) the luckiest chance which had ever befallen her; and that made me cry too, without understanding exactly why.</p>
				<p>So the child, that then was I, procured a pencil and a bit of wrapping-paper, and began to write laboriously:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">“Dear Lord</p>
					<p>“You know that Papa died and please comfort Mama and give Father a crown of Glory Ammen</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Your lamb and very sincerely yours</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">“Robert Etheridge Townsend.”</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>This appeared to the point as I reread it, and of course God would understand that children were not expected to write quite as straight across the paper as grown people. The one problem was how to deliver this, my first letter, most expeditiously, because when your mother cried you always cried too, and couldn’t stop, not even when you wanted to, not even when she promised you five cents, and it all made you horribly uncomfortable.</p>
				<p>I knew that the big Bible on the parlor table was God’s book. Probably God read it very often, since anybody would be proud of having written a book as big as that and would want to look at it every day. So I tiptoed into the darkened parlor. I use the word advisedly, for there was not at this period any drawing-room in Lichfield, and besides, a drawing-room is an entirely different matter.</p>
				<p>Everywhere the room was cool, and, since the shades were down, the outlines of the room’s contents were uncomfortably dubious; for just where the table stood had been, five days ago, a big and oddly-shaped black box with beautiful silver handles; and Uncle George had lifted me so that I could see through the pane of glass, which was a part of this funny box, while an infinity of decorous people rustled and whispered.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>I remember knowing they were “company” and thinking they coughed and sniffed because they were sorry that my father was dead. In the light of knowledge latterly acquired, I attribute these actions to the then prevalent weather, for even now I recall how stiflingly the room smelt of flowers⁠—particularly of magnolia blossoms⁠—and of rubber and of wet umbrellas. For my own part, I was not at all sorry, though of course I pretended to be, since I had always known that as a rule my father whipped me because he had just quarreled with my mother, and that he then enjoyed whipping me.</p>
				<p>I desired, in fine, that he should stay dead and possess his crown of glory in Heaven, which was reassuringly remote, and that my mother should stop crying. So I slipped my note into the Apocrypha.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>I felt that somewhere in the room was God and that God was watching me, but I was not afraid. Yet I entertained, in common with most children, a nebulous distrust of this mysterious Person, a distrust of which I was particularly conscious on winter nights when the gas had been turned down to a blue fleck, and the shadow of the mantelpiece flickered and plunged on the ceiling, and the clock ticked louder and louder, in prediction (I suspected) of some terrible event very close at hand.</p>
				<p>Then you remembered such unpleasant matters as Elisha and his bears, and those poor Egyptian children who had never even spoken to Moses, and that uncomfortably abstemious lady, in the fat blue-covered <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arabian Nights</i>, who ate nothing but rice, grain by grain⁠—in the daytime.⁠ ⁠… And you called Mammy, and said you were very thirsty and wanted a glass of water, please.</p>
				<p>Today, though, while acutely conscious of that awful inspection, and painstakingly careful not to look behind me, I was not, after all, precisely afraid. If God were a bit like other people I knew He would say, “What an odd child!” and I liked to have people say that. Still, there was sunlight in the hall, and lots of sunlight, not just long and dusty shreds of sunlight, and I felt more comfortable when I was back in the hall.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Reading</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>I lay flat upon my stomach, having found that posture most conformable to the practice of reading, and I considered the cover of this slim, green book; the name of John Charteris, stamped thereon in fat-bellied letters of gold, meant less to me than it was destined to signify thereafter.</p>
				<p>A deal of puzzling matter I found in this book, but in my memory, always, one fantastic passage clung as a burr to sheep’s wool. That fable, too, meant less to me than it was destined to signify thereafter, when the author of it was used to declare that he had, unwittingly, written it about me. Then I read again this</p>
				<section id="prologue-2-1">
					<header class="story-header">
						<p>Fable of the Foolish Prince</p>
					</header>
					<p>“As to all earlier happenings I choose in this place to be silent. Anterior adventures he had known of the right princely sort. But concerning his traffic with Schamir, the chief talisman, and how through its aid he won to the Sun’s Sister for a little while; and concerning his dealings with the handsome Troll-wife (in which affair the cat he bribed with butter and the elm-tree he had decked with ribbons helped him); and with that beautiful and dire Thuringian woman whose soul was a red mouse: we have in this place naught to do. Besides, the Foolish Prince had put aside such commerce when the Fairy came to guide him; so he, at least, could not in equity have grudged the same privilege to his historian.</p>
					<p>“Thus, the Fairy leading, the Foolish Prince went skipping along his father’s highway. But the road was bordered by so many wonders⁠—as here a bright pebble and there an anemone, say, and, just beyond, a brook which babbled an entreaty to be tasted⁠—that many folk had presently overtaken and had passed the loitering Foolish Prince. First came a grandee, supine in his gilded coach, with half-shut eyes, uneagerly meditant upon yesterday’s statecraft or tomorrow’s gallantry; and now three yokels, with ruddy cheeks and much dust upon their shoulders; now a haggard man in black, who constantly glanced backward; and now a corporal with an empty sleeve, who whistled as he went.</p>
					<p>“A butterfly guided every man of them along the highway. ‘For the Lord of the Fields is a whimsical person,’ said the Fairy, ‘and such is his very old enactment concerning the passage even of his cowpath; but princes each in his day and in his way may trample this domain as prompt their will and skill.’</p>
					<p>“ ‘That now is excellent hearing,’ said the Foolish Prince; and he strutted.</p>
					<p>“ ‘Look you,’ said the Fairy, ‘a man does not often stumble and break his shins in the highway, but rather in the byway.’⁠ ⁠…</p>
					<p>“Thus, the Fairy leading, the Foolish Prince went skipping on his allotted journey, though he paused once in a while to shake his bauble at the staring sun.</p>
					<p>“ ‘The stars,’ he considered, ‘are more sympathetic.’⁠ ⁠…</p>
					<p>“And thus, the Fairy leading, they came at last to a tall hedge wherein were a hundred wickets, all being closed; and those who had passed the Foolish Prince disputed before the hedge and measured the hundred wickets with thirty-nine articles and with a variety of instruments, and each man entered at his chosen wicket, and a butterfly went before him; but no man returned into the open country.</p>
					<p>“ ‘Now beyond each wicket,’ said the Fairy, ‘lies a great crucible, and by ninety and nine of these crucibles is a man consumed, or else transmuted into this animal or that animal. For such is the law in these parts and in human hearts.’</p>
					<p>“The Prince demanded how if one found by chance the hundredth wicket? But she shook her head and said that none of the Tylwydd Teg was permitted to enter the Disenchanted Garden. Rumor had it that within the Garden, beyond the crucibles, was a Tree, but whether the fruit of this Tree were sweet or bitter no person in the Fields could tell, nor did the Fairy pretend to know what happened in the Garden.</p>
					<p>“ ‘Then why, in heaven’s name, need a man test any of these wickets?’ cried the Foolish Prince; ‘with so much to lose and, it may be, nothing to gain? For one, I shall enter none of them.’</p>
					<p>“But once more she shook her glittering head. ‘In your House and in your Sign it was decreed. Time will be, my Prince; today the kid gambols and the ox chews his cud. Presently the butcher cries, <em>Time is!</em> Comes the hour and the power, and the cook bestirs herself and says, <em>Time was!</em> The master has his dinner, either way, all say, and every day.’</p>
					<p>“And the Fairy vanished as she talked with him, her radiances thinning into the neutral colors of smoke, and thence dwindling a little by a little into the vaulting spiral of a windless and a burnt-out fire, until nothing remained of her save her voice; and that was like the moving of dead leaves before they fall.</p>
					<p>“ ‘Truly,’ said the Foolish Prince, ‘I am compelled to consider this a vexatious business. For, look you, the butterfly I just now admire flits over this wicket, and then her twin flutters over that wicket, and between them there is absolutely no disparity in attraction. Hoo! here is a more sensible insect.’</p>
					<p>“And he leaped and cracked his heels together and ran after a golden butterfly that drifted to the rearward Fields. There was such a host of butterflies about that presently he had lost track of his first choice, and was in boisterous pursuit of a second, and then of a third, and then of yet others; but none of them did he ever capture, the while that one by one he followed divers butterflies of varying colors, and never a golden butterfly did he find any more.</p>
					<p>“When it was evening, the sky drew up the twilight from the east as a blotter draws up ink, and stars were kindling everywhere like tiny signal-fires, and a light wind came out of the murky east and rustled very plaintively in places where the more ambiguous shadows were; and the Foolish Prince shivered, for the air was growing chill, and the tips of his fingers were aware of it.</p>
					<p>“ ‘A crucible,’ he reflected, ‘possesses the minor virtue of continuous warmth.’</p>
					<p>“And before the hedge he found a Rational Person, led hither by a Clothes’ Moth, working out the problem of the hundred wickets in consonance with the most approved methods. ‘I have very nearly solved it,’ the Rational Person said, in genteel triumph, ‘but this evening grows too dark for any further ciphering, and again I must wait until tomorrow. I regret, sir, that you have elected to waste the day, in pursuit of various meretricious Lepidoptera.’</p>
					<p>“ ‘A happy day, my brother, is never wasted.’</p>
					<p>“ ‘That appears to me to be nonsense,’ said the Rational Person; and he put up his portfolio, preparatory to spending another night under his umbrella in the Fields.</p>
					<p>“ ‘Indeed, my brother?’ laughed the Foolish Prince. ‘Then, farewell, for I am assured that yonder, as here, our father makes the laws, and that to dispute his appreciation of the enticing qualities of butterflies were an impertinence.’</p>
					<p>“Thereafter, pushing open the wicket nearest to his hand, the Foolish Prince tucked his bauble under his left arm and skipped into the Disenchanted Garden; and as he went he sang, not noting that, from somewhere in the thickening shadows, had arisen a golden butterfly which went before him through the wicket.</p>
					<p>“Sang the Foolish Prince:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
						<p>
							<span class="i1">“‘Farewell to Fields and Butterflies</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And levities of Yester-year!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For we espy, and hold more dear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Wicket of our Destinies.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1">“‘Whereby we enter, once for all,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A Garden which such fruit doth yield</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As, tasted once, no more Afield</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We fare where Youth holds carnival.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1">“‘Farewell, fair Fields, none found amiss</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When laughter was a frequent noise</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And golden-hearted girls and boys</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Appraised the mouth they meant to kiss.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span class="i1">“‘Farewell, farewell! but for a space</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We, being young, Afield might stray,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That in our Garden nod and say,</span>
							<br/>
							<span><em>Afield is no unpleasant place</em>.’ ”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="prologue-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">Arithmetic</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>In such disconnected fashion, as hereafter, I record the moments of my life which I most vividly remember. For it is possible only in the last paragraphs of a book, and for a book’s people only, to look back upon an ordered and proportionate progression to what one has become; in life the thing arrives with scantier dignity; and one appears, in retrospection, less to have marched toward any goal than always to have jumped and scrambled from one stepping-stone to another because, however momentarily, “just this or that poor impulse seemed the sole work of a lifetime.”</p>
				<p>Well! at least I have known these moments and the rapture of their dominance; and I am not lightly to be stripped of recollection of them, nor of the attendant thrill either, by any cheerless hour wherein, as sometimes happens, my personal achievements confront me like a pile of flimsy jackstraws.</p>
				<p>What does it all amount to?⁠—I do not know. There may be some sort of supernal bookkeeping, somewhere, but very certainly it is not conformable to any human mathematics.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
